As you all know, the COVID-19 pandemic has caused significant disruption and hardship in nearly every aspect of our lives, and it continues to weigh heavily on our national economy, which is why it will be the central focus of my remarks here today.
Let me set the stage for our discussion by outlining the economic effects of the pandemic most relevant to the banking sector, describing the Federal Reserve's response to the crisis, and then making some observations about conditions for smaller banks.
We began this year with the economy in excellent shape—by some measures the strongest in decades.
From my seat as a monetary policymaker, we appeared to be in a good position regarding both legs of our dual mandate, which are maximum employment and stable prices.
Efforts to contain the spread of the virus caused a sudden stop in economic activity during March and April.
While the extent of the closures and shutdowns varied widely throughout the country, the sudden loss of employment and the contraction in output were like nothing our nation has experienced before.
The decline in activity was mostly due to temporary business closures, and the economy has bounced back noticeably in recent months as businesses reopen and fiscal support was distributed to many Americans.
Even so, the economy is still far from back to normal.
While most indications are that agriculture land prices continue to hold fairly steady, I have seen some reports that less-productive land has been showing some hints of cracks in valuations.
According to the Fed's latest Report on The Economic Well-Being of U.S.
Households were in a generally strong financial position at the beginning of this year, but the restrictions implemented to fight COVID-19 resulted in an unprecedented spike in unemployment, which likely led to a number of families finding it difficult to keep up with their payment obligations.
Along with our monetary policy actions, stimulus checks and enhanced unemployment benefits provided in the CARES Act have been a substantial and timely source of financial support to households during this difficult time.
Understanding the financial stress this could place on many borrowers, the Fed and other federal regulators implemented guidance to encourage banks to work with their borrowers.
It remains possible that the economic challenges will persist beyond the forbearance time period provided in the CARES Act, and if so, we would almost certainly see some of these loans transition into longer-term delinquency status or enter into renewed deferment periods.
To give some sense of the losses, employment in the leisure and hospitality sectors nationwide was down nearly 40 percent in the 12 months through May and still down about 25 percent through July.
Retail employment fell 15 percent over March and April, though it has recovered substantially since then, and in July it was 6 percent below the pre-COVID level.
Timely and supportive fiscal and monetary policy measures also have helped, but with the progress of the recovery still tentative, I expect that many businesses will continue to fight for survival in the months ahead, with the support of their lenders and communities.
Looking ahead, the economic outlook will continue to evolve quickly.
Even so, positive cases and hospitalizations have risen in some areas and continue to weigh on some regions and the overall economy.
We must therefore recognize that progress toward a full recovery in economic activity may well be slow and uneven
Now let me turn to the Federal Reserve's role in the government's response to the pandemic.
To support households and businesses, the Fed quickly lowered our target for the federal funds rate, which has helped to lower borrowing costs but created a different challenge for financial institutions—depressed net interest margins.
These programs were designed to restore and sustain proper functioning in certain financial markets that had seized up in March and to facilitate the continued flow of credit from banks to households and businesses.
One federal stimulus program that relied heavily on the participation and expertise of community bankers is the Paycheck Protection Program (PPP).
Community bankers played a crucial role in getting these funds to businesses that needed it, showing once again how essential community banks are to the customers they serve.
And in response to feedback we received from a number of community bankers, the Fed created the PPP lending facility to alleviate balance-sheet capacity issues for banks that otherwise would not have been able to provide PPP loans to their small-business customers.
The Federal Reserve has not engaged in lending directly to businesses before, but it was a step that seemed appropriate considering the breadth and depth of the challenges we face.
We continue to solicit feedback and make adjustments to the program based on the suggestions received from bankers and other stakeholders, and we continue to welcome your thoughts and ideas on how we can make Main Street more effective.
Together, these policy actions have helped stabilize financial markets, boost consumer and business sentiment, and assist millions of households and thousands of businesses harmed by the response to the pandemic.
Credit markets, which had seized up earlier this year, have resumed functioning.
In our other role as a prudential regulator and bank supervisor, the Federal Reserve took several steps intended to reduce burden on banks and help them focus on the needs of their customers and communities.
Together, with our fellow federal regulators, we delayed the impact of the CECL accounting standard in our capital rules and temporarily eased the leverage ratio requirement for community banks.
From a supervisory perspective, beginning in late March the Fed paused examinations for most small banks and took steps to lengthen remediation timeframes for outstanding issues.
We considered the exam pause an important step to provide bankers time to adjust operations to protect the health of customers and employees, to prioritize the financial needs of their customers and communities, and to play an essential and vital role in implementing critical relief programs like the PPP.
As we continue to support the recovery and work to ensure that supervision and examination is as effective and efficient as possible, I think it's important to hear directly from you, who are actually working in the economy, about the conditions facing your communities and any challenges impeding your ability to meet the needs of your customers.
In addition to my regular outreach to community banks, I am currently engaged in an effort to speak with every CEO of the more than 650 community banks supervised by the Fed.
These conversations are incredibly valuable to me as a bank regulator and policymaker.
They give context to the mountains of data we analyze and a unique perspective with real-world local examples to a complex and dynamic economic picture.
For those of you from Fed member banks who I have not yet had the opportunity to meet or speak with by phone in these times of COVID, I look forward to our conversation.
Your local Reserve Bank will be in contact to find a convenient time for us to meet.
This audience knows better than most that smaller banks entered the pandemic in strong condition.
At the end of 2019, over 95 percent of community and regional banks supervised by the Fed were rated a 1 or 2 under the CAMELS rating system.
After coming through the last financial crisis in generally stronger condition than larger banks, smaller institutions had strengthened their capital positions and substantially improved asset quality in the years since, leaving them better positioned to deal with the current stress related to the pandemic.
Likewise, credit concentrations, especially in construction and commercial real estate, were lower for smaller banks than at the outset of the last financial crisis, and risk management of concentrations improved over the last decade.
Smaller banks also entered the pandemic with high levels of liquidity, and this liquidity has further improved with deposit inflows associated with pandemic-related stimulus programs.
Overall, community and regional banks remain well positioned to continue to extend credit and play an essential role in supporting our nation's recovery from the effects of COVID-19.
With this in mind, on June 15 the Federal Reserve announced our plan to resume bank examinations.
Our initial focus will be to assess higher risk banks, particularly those with credit concentrations in higher risk or stressed industries.
Finally, we will continue to be sensitive to the capacity of each bank to participate in examinations and strive to prevent undue burden on banks struggling with crisis-related operational challenges.
While the road ahead is highly uncertain, and we don't yet know when the economy will return to its previous strength, America will recover from this crisis, as it has from all of our past challenges.
Our economic fundamentals are strong, and we have the solid foundation of the entrepreneurial spirit and resiliency of the American people.
For its part, the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor progress and respond promptly and flexibly to support the recovery.
We will closely watch economic and financial conditions, and we will use our monetary policy tools to respond as appropriate to pursue our dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability.
We will also remain open to further adjustments to supervisory schedules and expectations, as needed.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S.

We are here today because of the tireless efforts of brave women—including Kansas women—demanding that men and women have an equal right to vote and shape their destiny.
In my case, it was serving as Kansas's first female State Bank Commissioner, and the first person to serve on the Federal Reserve Board in the role designated by Congress for someone with community banking experience.
As many here know, in 1861, Kansas granted women a limited right to vote in school district elections; and, by 1867, Kansas became the first U.S.
In my current role, I bring the perspective of someone from a small, rural, agricultural community, who has worked as a community banker and as a state regulator.
This diversity is a strength, as Congress recognized by creating a role on the Federal Reserve Board designated for someone with community banking experience.
I am the first to serve in this capacity, and I strongly believe that our economic and financial system is strengthened when we consider the implications of our regulatory decisions for bankers on Main Street as well as on Wall Street.
I approach our monetary policy deliberations in a similar way.
Our actions in response to the recent pandemic have clearly benefited from this perspective, as we understand how the varying state and local approaches have affected economic conditions across the nation.
Another way is through public service, and I would strongly encourage all—but in particular women—to consider serving in government at the local, state, or federal level.

At the Federal Reserve Board and Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's Innovation Office Hours, San Francisco, California (via webcast)
The Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco is a leader of our engagement with the tech community.
And the Federal Reserve's Innovation Office Hours serve as an important forum to engage on innovation in the financial system with financial institutions, fintechs, technology companies, nonprofits, and other stakeholders.
This event covered a number of important topics, including regulatory technology, blockchain, cybersecurity, and digital banking.
The COVID-19 pandemic is taking a tremendous toll on communities across America, especially households and small businesses with the least resources to weather the storm.2 The COVID-19 crisis is a dramatic reminder of the importance of a resilient and trusted payments infrastructure that is accessible to all Americans.
It was notable that after a sharp reduction in spending early in the COVID-19 crisis, many households increased their spending starting on the day they received emergency relief payments under the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act (CARES Act) and continuing for the following 10 days–especially households with lower incomes, greater income declines, and lower liquid savings.3 The urgency with which the CARES Act emergency payments were spent underscores the importance of immediate and trusted access to funds for the many households and businesses that face cash-flow constraints.
That is why the Federal Reserve remains committed to delivering on the FedNowSM Service, which will enable millions of American households and small businesses to get instant access to funds rather than waiting days for checks to clear.4
More broadly, banks, fintech companies, and technology firms are all exploring the use of innovative technologies to enhance payments efficiency, expand financial inclusion, speed up settlement flows, and reduce end-user costs.
Digital currencies, including central bank digital currencies (CBDCs), present opportunities but also risks associated with privacy, illicit activity, and financial stability.
The introduction of Bitcoin and the subsequent emergence of stablecoins with potentially global reach, such as Facebook's Libra, have raised fundamental questions about legal and regulatory safeguards, financial stability, and the role of currency in society.
This prospect has intensified calls for CBDCs to maintain the sovereign currency as the anchor of the nation's payment systems.
With these important issues in mind, the Federal Reserve is active in conducting research and experimentation related to distributed ledger technologies and the potential use cases for digital currencies.
Given the dollar's important role, it is essential that the Federal Reserve remain on the frontier of research and policy development regarding CBDCs.
As part of this research, central banks are exploring the potential of innovative technologies to offer a digital equivalent of cash.
Like other central banks, we are continuing to assess the opportunities and challenges of, as well as the use cases for, a CBDC, as a complement to cash and other payments options.
We have been conducting in-house experiments for the last few years, through means that include the Board's Technology Lab, which has been building and testing a range of distributed ledger platforms to understand their potential opportunity and risk.
This multidisciplinary team, with application developers from the Federal Reserve Banks of Cleveland, Dallas, and New York, supports a policy team at the Board that is studying the implications of digital currencies on the payments ecosystem, monetary policy, financial stability, banking and finance, and consumer protection.
To enhance the Federal Reserve's understanding of digital currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston is collaborating with researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology in a multiyear effort to build and test a hypothetical digital currency oriented to central bank uses.
The objectives of our research and experimentation across the Federal Reserve System are to assess the safety and efficiency of digital currency systems, to inform our understanding of private-sector arrangements, and to give us hands-on experience to understand the opportunities and limitations of possible technologies for digital forms of central bank money.
These efforts are intended to ensure that we fully understand the potential as well as the associated risks and possible unintended consequences that new technologies present in the payments arena.
Separately, a significant policy process would be required to consider the issuance of a CBDC, along with extensive deliberations and engagement with other parts of the federal government and a broad set of other stakeholders.
It is important to understand how the existing provisions of the Federal Reserve Act with regard to currency issuance apply to a CBDC and whether a CBDC would have legal tender status, depending on the design.
The Federal Reserve has not made a decision whether to undertake such a significant policy process, as we are taking the time and effort to understand the significant implications of digital currencies and CBDCs around the globe.
In addition to these experiments, the Federal Reserve continues to collaborate with and learn from other central banks.
We are participating in the CBDC coalition of central banks.
While each country will make decisions on whether to issue and how to design a CBDC based on its own domestic legal framework and financial and economic context, we benefit from collaboration on CBDC research.
Sharing lessons learned, jointly conducting experiments, and bringing diverse expertise to bear helps us make progress in developing potential approaches to address challenging hurdles, such as threats to cybersecurity, counterfeiting and fraud, and anti-money laundering, to name a few, as well as on shared goals, such as increasing the ease and efficiency of cross-border transactions.
Since financial and payments systems share extensive cross-border linkages, a poorly designed CBDC issued in one jurisdiction could create financial stability issues in another jurisdiction.
A cyberattack on a CBDC arrangement in one jurisdiction could create domestic financial stress, which could, in turn, affect linked economies or have broader effects if confidence in certain technologies or payment mechanisms is eroded.
More broadly, the Federal Reserve looks forward to increased international engagement on matters related to innovation and technological change that impact central banks and those we serve.
Our new initiative with the Bank of International Settlement's Innovation Hub, through an innovation center at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, will provide a useful venue for increased cooperation and exchange.5
Let me conclude by noting that innovation is central to our work.
We remain committed to understanding how technological advances can help the Federal Reserve carry out our core missions, as well as how they are changing the ways that banks, payments, and financial markets operate.
For example, we are leveraging machine learning, natural language processing, and other artificial intelligence tools to help us analyze data, and we are monitoring how financial institutions use these tools in their decisionmaking.
We are expanding our use of cloud computing to enhance our operations, and we continue to enhance our cybersecurity tools to strengthen our cyber posture.
These and other technologies are fundamentally changing every aspect of our work, and the Federal Reserve remains optimistic about the power of healthy innovation to improve the resilience, efficiency, and inclusiveness of our financial system when the appropriate safeguards are in place.
I am grateful to David Mills and Paul Wong as well as Melissa Leistra, Sonja Danburg, and Kathy Wilson of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
For information on the impact of COVID-19 on communities around the country, see Federal Reserve System, FedListens: Perspectives from the Public (PDF) (Federal Reserve System, June 2020); and Claire Kramer Mills and Jessica Battisto, "Double Jeopardy: COVID-19's Concentrated Health and Wealth Effects in Black Communities, Federal Reserve Bank of New York (PDF)," Brief (Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2020).
Farrokhnia, Steffen Meyer, Michaela Pagel, and Constantine Yannelis, "Income, Liquidity, and the Consumption Response to the 2020 Economic Stimulus Payments," NBER Working Paper Series 27097 (Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2020).
See Lael Brainard, "The Future of Retail Payments in the United States (PDF)" (remarks at the FedNow Service Webinar, Washington, D.C.
Bank for International Settlements, "BIS Innovation Hub to Expand to New Locations in Europe and North America," news release, June 30, 2020.

It is a pleasure to be here today with Esther George and Ken Montgomery to talk about the future of America's retail payment system.
Recognizing that the retail payment infrastructure touches every American, a year ago, the Federal Reserve committed to build its first major new payment system in four decades.
The COVID-19 pandemic has heightened the urgency and importance of delivering a resilient instant payment system that is accessible to all Americans.
The COVID-19 pandemic is taking a tremendous toll on communities across America, especially households and small businesses with the least liquid resources to weather the storm.2 Emergency relief payments authorized in the Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act, or CARES Act, provided a vital lifeline for many households.3 The rapid expenditure of the COVID emergency relief payments highlights the critical urgency of immediate access to funds for the many households and businesses managing cash-flow constraints.
The Federal Reserve, acting as Fiscal Agent for the U.S.
An instant payment infrastructure ensures the funds are available immediately, which could be especially important for households on fixed incomes or living paycheck to paycheck, when waiting days for the funds to be available to pay a bill can mean overdraft fees or late fees that can compound, or reliance on costly sources of credit.
For small businesses, the ability to receive customer payments instantly could help them manage cash flows when working capital is tied up in materials or inventory.
Consumers and businesses across the country want and expect instant payments, and the banks they trust should be able to provide this service securely.
One year ago, the Federal Reserve announced we would build the FedNow Service to enable banks of every size and in every community in America to provide safe and efficient instant payment services around the clock, every day of the year.7 The FedNow Service will facilitate end-to-end instant payment services for consumers and businesses, increase competition, and ensure equitable access to banks of all sizes nationwide.
The Federal Reserve is uniquely positioned to build an instant payment infrastructure, given our long history of operating payment systems to promote a safe, efficient, and broadly accessible payment infrastructure.
The decision to build an instant payment infrastructure reflected support from a broad set of stakeholders, including the vast majority of over 400 commenters that responded to the Board's 2018 notice, as well as the U.S.
Treasury.8 Our public mission in providing payment services is built on the proposition that all banks and the communities they serve, no matter their size or geographic location, should have equitable access to the U.S.
Through the direct connections that we have with more than 10,000 banks, the FedNow Service will be broadly accessible to banks and the communities they serve across the country.
The FedNow Service will not only expand but also strengthen the U.S.
payment infrastructure by operating alongside the private-sector instant payment service, the Clearing House's RTP network.
As they do for other payment services, many banks may choose to maintain access to more than one instant payment service to attain resiliency through redundancy.
Moreover, the Federal Reserve has always had a vital role in the payment system by providing liquidity and operational continuity in times of stress, and the FedNow Service will extend this role directly into the instant payment market.
Together, the FedNow and RTP services should significantly increase the speed and efficiency of the U.S.
The presence of more than one service provider also brings the efficiency benefits associated with competition and benefits consumers, according to analysis from the U.S.
Since last August, the Federal Reserve has made substantial strides in developing the FedNow Service, including on the evaluation of prototypes of the core clearing and settlement functionality.
Across the Federal Reserve System, work has continued apace, commensurate with the high priority of the initiative, even as we have mobilized an unprecedented response to the COVID-19 shock.
We have a team of over 100 people working on the program, including experts drawn from across the Federal Reserve System and key external hires.
Since we initiated the FedNow Service one year ago, we have been meeting our project milestones, and today I am pleased to announce the Federal Reserve Board has approved the core features and functionality based on extensive input from stakeholders.
We heard loud and clear from stakeholders the primary importance of getting this service to the market as quickly as possible.
To meet this goal, we are announcing a phased approach that will enable the FedNow Service to get to market expeditiously with a core set of features and to expand available features over time in response to changes in technology and market needs.
First, we heard strong support for fraud tools within the FedNow Service to support banks' efforts to mitigate the risk of fraud with instant payments.
Accordingly, upon implementation, banks will be able proactively to set parameters that limit transaction activity in the FedNow Service based on banks' knowledge of their own customers.
Second, banks told us they want to be able to ensure they have adequate funds in their Federal Reserve accounts on a 24x7x365 basis to cover outflows related to instant payments, especially during hours when existing payment services are not open and funds cannot be transferred into Federal Reserve accounts to cover intraday overdrafts.
Accordingly, we will develop a liquidity management tool that allows a participant with excess funds in its Federal Reserve account to transfer funds to another participant who needs the funds on weekends, holidays, and after hours.
Moreover, we will make the liquidity management tool available for instant payments broadly, including to banks that choose not to participate in the FedNow Service.
Participants in a private-sector instant payments service will be able to use the tool to transfer funds from their Federal Reserve accounts to the joint account at a Reserve Bank that backs settlement in that service.
Third, it will be important for the FedNow Service to be interoperable with the private-sector instant payment service to accomplish the goal of nationwide reach for instant payments.
As we have learned from experience with our other payment services, the form and timeline for achieving interoperability will depend on the level of commitment and engagement from stakeholders across the industry, including the operators of other instant payment settlement services, both present and future.
In part to facilitate interoperability, the FedNow Service design will use the widely accepted ISO 20022 message standard and other industry best practices.10 To the extent other instant payment services fully adopt the same publicly available, widely accepted standards, this approach would enable a form of interoperability where banks can route payments through either the FedNow Service or other instant payment services based on the available path to the receiver.
This is similar to the prevailing approach in payment card transactions, for instance.
We are also open to collaborating on a form of interoperability where messages can be exchanged between the FedNow Service and private-sector instant payment service operators, similar to the approach used in automated clearinghouse (ACH) systems.
Implementing this approach would significantly increase the required level of commitment and active engagement of the private-sector instant payment service operator from the outset.
It will be important for the FedNow Service to support alias-based payments, whereby a payment can be sent to a recipient using an alias, such as an email address or phone number, rather than requiring an account number.
But providing this feature securely requires addressing legal, operational, and security challenges that would increase the time to market for the core service.
Balancing these considerations, we will explore the best ways to add a directory service or other approach to alias-based payments with the goal of providing this feature as a high priority following the initial launch.
As we proceed with the development of the FedNow Service, we will continue our engagement with a broad set of stakeholders to gain input on desired features and to work with banks and their service providers on preparations to adopt the service.
In May, the Federal Reserve Banks announced the formation of the FedNow Community for stakeholders who would like to help inform the development of the FedNow Service.11 The Community currently has over 500 members from all segments of the payment ecosystem.
We are working with service providers, recognizing their importance in providing essential payment processing services for thousands of banks in this country.
We are also engaging directly with the fintech and software companies who provide customer-facing services that will help banks build innovative instant payment products to serve their communities.
The readiness of these stakeholders to support banks' participation in the FedNow Service and expand potential uses through value-added services is key to widespread adoption of instant payments.
We look forward to our continued partnership with banks and other stakeholders in this transformative initiative to deliver a safe and efficient instant payment system with national reach.
As the central bank, our focus on the safety and integrity of the payment system means we need to ensure that payment innovations do not come at the cost of security, reliability, or consumer protections.
Some newer payment services, while providing what has the look and feel of an instant payment experience for consumers, in fact rely on legacy infrastructure that actually settles transactions on a deferred basis, creating risk for consumers, banks, and the payment system overall.
In contrast, the FedNow Service will offer real-time gross settlement of transactions, an approach that involves each transaction being processed individually and immediately, which avoids interbank credit risk.
Efforts by global stablecoin networks such as Facebook's Libra project to drive the next stage of payment innovation have raised other fundamental questions about legal and regulatory safeguards, financial stability, and the appropriate role of private money.12 The Federal Reserve remains optimistic about the power of technology and innovation to deliver payments safely, immediately, and efficiently when the appropriate safeguards are in place.13 We are committed to building an instant payment system that delivers the payment speed that users want without bypassing the legal and regulatory protections they have come to expect from banking relationships.
Ultimately, the FedNow Service can be a catalyst for innovation in the market by providing a neutral platform on which the private sector can build to offer safe, efficient instant payment services to users across the country.
The promise of the FedNow Service is that it will provide a modern payment infrastructure for the future, bringing the benefits of instant payments to communities across America and improving the way households, businesses, and government agencies make payments for many years to come.
I am grateful to Kirstin Wells of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
For information on the impact of COVID-19 on communities around the country, see Federal Reserve System, FedListens, Perspectives from the Public (PDF) (Federal Reserve System, June 2020); and Claire Kramer Mills and Jessica Battisto, "Double Jeopardy: COVID-19's Concentrated Health and Wealth Effects in Black Communities, Federal Reserve Bank of New York (PDF)," Brief (Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2020).
Bhutta, Blair, Dettling, and Moore (2020) show that in the absence of the CARES Act, only half of families suffering job loss would have been able to finance spending for six months using only liquid savings and standard unemployment benefits, while 94 percent of families would be able to maintain spending for six months with additional benefits from the CARES Act.
Farrokhnia, Steffen Meyer, Michaela Pagel, and Constantine Yannelis, "Income, Liquidity, and the Consumption Response to the 2020 Economic Stimulus Payments," NBER Working Paper Series 27097 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May 2020).
See also Ezra Karger and Aastha Rajan, "Heterogeneity in the Marginal Propensity to Consume: Evidence from Covid-19 Stimulus Payments," Working Paper Series 2020-15 (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May 2020); and Raj Chetty, John N.
Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Michael Stepner, and the Opportunity Insights Team, "How Did COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies Affect Spending and Employment? A New Real-Time Economic Tracker Based on Private Sector Data (PDF)," Opportunity Insights Working Paper (Cambridge, Mass.: Opportunity Insights, May 2020).
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S.
Lael Brainard, "Delivering Fast Payments for All" (remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Town Hall, August 5, 2019); "Supporting Fast Payments for All" (remarks at the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Chicago, October 3, 2018).
Federal Reserve Actions to Support Interbank Settlement of Faster Payments, 84 Fed.
Potential Federal Reserve Actions to Support Interbank Settlement of Faster Payments, Request for Comments, 83 Fed.
Treasury, A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunity: Nonbank Financials, Fintech, and Innovation (PDF) (Department of the Treasury, July 2018), 156–157.
The GAO found that competition by the Federal Reserve in payment markets has generally had a positive impact, with benefits that include lowered cost of processing payments for end users.
Government Accountability Office, GAO-16-614, Federal Reserve's Competition with Other Providers Benefits Customers, but Additional Reviews Could Increase Assurance of Cost Accuracy, GAO-16-614 (Washington: Government Accountability Office, August 2016).
The ISO 20022 standard is a message format standard for payments, securities, trade services, payment cards, and foreign exchange.
See the FedNow Community press release, Federal Reserve, "Federal Reserve Announces FedNowSM Community," press release, May 6, 2020.
Lael Brainard, "Digital Currencies, Stablecoins, and the Evolving Payments Landscape" (remarks at The Future of Money in the Digital Age, Sponsored by the Peterson Institute for International Economics and Princeton University's Bendheim Center for Finance, Washington, D.C., October 16, 2019).

At the Perspectives on the Pandemic Webinar Series, hosted by the National Association for Business Economics, Washington, D.C.
Following the deepest plunge since the Great Depression, employment and activity rebounded faster and more sharply than anticipated.
But the recent resurgence in COVID cases is a sober reminder that the pandemic remains the key driver of the economy's course.
Looking ahead, it likely will be appropriate to shift the focus of monetary policy from stabilization to accommodation by supporting a full recovery in employment and a sustained return of inflation to its 2 percent objective.1
A variety of data suggest the economy bottomed out in April and rebounded in May and June.
Retail sales jumped 18 percent in May, exceeding market expectations, and real personal consumption expenditures (PCE) are estimated to have increased 8 percent.
Uncertainty will remain elevated as long as the pandemic hangs over the economy.
A broad second wave could re-ignite financial market volatility and market disruptions at a time of greater vulnerability.
Nonbank financial institutions could again come under pressure, as they did in March, and some banks might pull back on lending if they face rising losses or weaker capital positions.
A closer look at the labor market data hints at the complexity.
The improvement in the labor market started earlier, and has been stronger, than had been anticipated.
Over May and June, payroll employment increased by 7.5 million, the unemployment rate fell 3.6 percentage points, and the labor force participation rate rose 1.3 percentage points.4 The large bounceback is a sharp contrast to the Global Financial Crisis, when the initial employment decline was shallower and it took much longer before a similar share of the initial job losses was recouped.
They likely were driven by an earlier-than-expected rollback of COVID-related restrictions as businesses ramped up hiring and consumers exhibited more comfort engaging in commercial activities, as well as by a boost to employment from the Paycheck Protection Program.
It is unclear whether the rapid pace of labor market recovery will be sustained going forward, and risks are to the downside.
These developments mostly occurred after the reference period for the June employment report.
After declining at a fast clip through early June, initial claims for unemployment insurance have moved roughly sideways in recent weeks and remained at a still elevated level of 1.3 million in the week ending July 4.5 Some high-frequency indicators tracked by Federal Reserve Board staff (including mobility data and employment in small businesses) suggest that the strong pace of improvement in May and the first half of June may not be sustained.
After finally seeing welcome progress narrowing the gaps in labor market outcomes by race and ethnicity in the late stage of the previous recovery, the COVID shock is inflicting a disproportionate share of job losses on African American and Hispanic workers.
Separately, on the other side of our dual mandate, inflation has receded further below its 2 percent objective—reflecting weaker demand along with lower oil prices in recent months.
Both core and total PCE price inflation measures have weakened, with the 12-month percent changes through May standing at 1.0 percent and 0.5 percent, respectively.7 Measures of inflation expectations are mixed; while market-based measures have moved below their typical ranges of recent years, survey measures have remained relatively stable within their recent historical ranges.8 Nonetheless, with inflation coming in below its 2 percent objective for many years, the risk that inflation expectations could drift lower complicates the task of monetary policy.
Several daily and weekly retail spending indicators tracked by Federal Reserve Board staff suggest that household spending increased quickly in response to stimulus payments and expanded unemployment insurance benefits.
Household spending stepped up in mid-April, coinciding with the first disbursement of stimulus payments to households and a ramp-up in the payout of unemployment benefits, and showed the most pronounced increases in the states that received more benefits.9 With some of the fiscal support measures either provided as one-off payments or slated to come to an end in July, the strength of the recovery will depend importantly on the timing, magnitude, and distribution of additional fiscal support.
Some parts of the CRE market—most notably, the lodging and retail segment—are experiencing significant distress and have seen sharp increases in delinquency rates along with tighter bank lending standards.
For equipment investment, production and supply chain disruptions and high levels of uncertainty continue to weigh on expenditures.
The cross-border distancing associated with the virus raises the possibility of persistent changes to global supply chains.
economy, the virus may cause durable changes to business models in a variety of activities, resulting in greater reliance on remote work, reductions in nonessential travel, and changes to CRE usage and valuations.
In downside scenarios, there could be some persistent damage to the productive capacity of the economy from the loss of valuable employment relationships, depressed investment, and the destruction of intangible business capital.
As the Federal Reserve Board's May Financial Stability Report highlighted, the nonfinancial business sector started the year with historically elevated levels of debt.10 Already this year, we have seen about $800 billion in downgrades of investment-grade debt and $55 billion in corporate defaults—a faster pace than in the initial months of the Global Financial Crisis.
It remains vitally important to make our emergency credit facilities as broadly accessible as we can in order to avoid the costly insolvencies of otherwise viable employers and the associated hardship from permanent layoffs.
Finally, in keeping with the global nature of the pandemic, foreign developments could impinge on the U.S.
The International Monetary Fund estimates that real global gross domestic product dropped at an annual rate of about 18 percent in the second quarter after falling nearly 13 percent in the first quarter.
While the potential for a fiscal response across the euro area is positive and important, there has been some renewal of tensions between the United States and China, and the outlook for many emerging markets remains fragile.
The Federal Reserve moved rapidly and aggressively to restore the normal functioning of markets and the flow of credit to households and businesses.
With the restoration of smooth market functioning and credit flows, our emergency facilities are appropriately moving into the background, providing confidence that they remain available as an insurance policy if storm clouds again move in.
The healing in the labor market is likely to take some time.
Last month, a majority of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants indicated they expect economic activity to decline notably this year and recover only gradually over the following two years.
A majority of FOMC participants indicated that they expect core inflation to remain below our 2 percent objective and employment to fall short of its maximum level at least through the end of 2022.
Looking ahead, it will be important for monetary policy to pivot from stabilization to accommodation by supporting a full recovery in employment and returning inflation to its 2 percent objective on a sustained basis.
As we move to the next phase of monetary policy, we will be guided not only by the exigencies of the COVID crisis, but also by our evolving understanding of the key longer-run features of the economy, so as to avoid the premature withdrawal of necessary support.
Because the long-run neutral rate of interest is quite low by historical standards, there is less room to cut the policy rate in order to cushion the economy from COVID and other shocks.
The likelihood that the policy rate is at the lower bound more frequently risks eroding expected and actual inflation, which could further compress the room to cut nominal interest rates in a downward spiral.
With underlying inflation running below 2 percent for many years and COVID contributing to a further decline, it is important that monetary policy support inflation expectations that are consistent with inflation centered on 2 percent over time.
And with inflation exhibiting low sensitivity to labor market tightness, policy should not preemptively withdraw support based on a historically steeper Phillips curve that is not currently in evidence.
Instead, policy should seek to achieve employment outcomes with the kind of breadth and depth that were only achieved late in the previous recovery.11
With the policy rate constrained by the effective lower bound, forward guidance constitutes a vital way to provide the necessary accommodation.
For instance, research suggests that refraining from liftoff until inflation reaches 2 percent could lead to some modest temporary overshooting, which would help offset the previous underperformance.12 Balance sheet policies can help extend accommodation by more directly influencing the interest rates that are relevant for household and business borrowing and investment.
Forward guidance and asset purchases were road-tested in the previous crisis, so there is a high degree of familiarity with their use.
Given the downside risks to the outlook, there may come a time when it is helpful to reinforce the credibility of forward guidance and lessen the burden on the balance sheet with the addition of targets on the short-to-medium end of the yield curve.13 Given the lack of familiarity with front-end yield curve targets in the United States, such an approach would likely come into focus only after additional analysis and discussion.
The Federal Reserve remains actively committed to supporting the flow of credit to households and businesses and providing a backstop if downside risks materialize.
I am grateful to Ivan Vidangos of the Federal Reserve Board for assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) has indicated that the official unemployment rate has understated the extent of joblessness in recent months because many workers who lost their jobs were incorrectly reported as being employed but absent from work, rather than unemployed on temporary layoff.
The BLS estimated that this misclassification held down the unemployment rate by about 5 percentage points in April and by about 1 percentage point in June, such that the reduction in the unemployment rate would be about 7-1/2 percentage points if these job losses were classified correctly.
See Jason Bram and Fatih Karahan (2020), "Translating Weekly Jobless Claims into Monthly Net Job Losses," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), May 7.
In addition, the Department of Labor stated that 49 states reported about 1 million initial claims for Pandemic Unemployment Assistance (PUA) in the week ending July 4.
However, since most PUA applicants must first apply for, and be denied, regular state unemployment insurance (UI) benefits before they apply for PUA, initial PUA claims and initial claims for regular UI benefits will be strongly correlated (likely with some lag) and do not constitute independent measures of the number of unemployed persons seeking unemployment benefits.
The Current Population Survey (or household survey) measures the number of employed persons and includes detailed demographic information, whereas the Current Employment Statistics survey (or establishment survey) measures the number of jobs in the payrolls of nonfarm establishments.
That said, the trimmed mean PCE inflation rate calculated by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas over the 12 months ending in May remained stable at 2.0 percent; the data as of May 2020 are available on the Bank's website at https://www.dallasfed.org/research/pce.
And this morning's Consumer Price Index (CPI) data for June showed some signs of stabilization, with both core and total CPI inflation increasing noticeably last month, driven by a partial rebound in price categories that seemed most affected by social distancing in prior months (such as apparel, accommodation, and transportation services).
The median 5-to-10-year measure from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers and the median three-year-ahead expected inflation from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's Survey of Consumer Expectations both came in at 2.5 percent in June—well within their ranges in recent years.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation over the next few years have retraced much of their sharp declines in mid-March but remain below their typical ranges in recent years.
The 5-to-10-year measure of longer-term inflation compensation derived from Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, at around 1.4 percent, remains notably below pre-pandemic levels.
This evidence is also consistent with recent research by Baker and others, who examine a panel of households using a financial planning app and show that these households responded quickly to CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) stimulus payments despite stay-at-home orders and social distancing; see Scott R.
Farrokhnia, Steffen Meyer, Michaela Pagel, and Constantine Yannelis (2020), "Income, Liquidity, and the Consumption Response to the 2020 Economic Stimulus Payments," NBER Working Paper Series 27097 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May).
See Ezra Karger and Aastha Rajan (2020), "Heterogeneity in the Marginal Propensity to Consume: Evidence from Covid-19 Stimulus Payments," Working Paper Series 2020-15 (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May); and Raj Chetty, John N.
Friedman, Nathaniel Hendren, Michael Stepner, and the Opportunity Insights Team (2020), "How Did COVID-19 and Stabilization Policies Affect Spending and Employment? A New Real-Time Economic Tracker Based on Private Sector Data (PDF)," Opportunity Insights Working Paper (Cambridge, Mass.: Opportunity Insights, May).
Analysis by Bhutta and others uses data from the Survey of Consumer Finances to assess how the cash assistance (expanded unemployment insurance benefits and stimulus payments) under the CARES Act would help families cope with job loss and find that the CARES Act dramatically improves households' financial security; see Neil Bhutta, Jacqueline Blair, Lisa J.
In contrast, in the absence of the CARES Act, only about half of working families would be able to cover six months of expenses by relying exclusively on their liquid savings and standard unemployment insurance benefits.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), Financial Stability Report (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, May).
See Lael Brainard (2019), "Federal Reserve Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications: Some Preliminary Views," Remarks at the Presentation of the 2019 William F.
Roberts (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February).
During the recovery from the previous financial crisis, there were several junctures when the expectations implied by market pricing and Committee communications got out of alignment, which proved costly.

Global in Life and Orderly in Death: Post-Crisis Reforms and the Too-Big-to-Fail Question
Vice Chair for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K.
This afternoon I will consider the challenges that the outbreak of the COVID-19 virus and, especially, the containment measures taken by many governments in response (which together I will call the "COVID event") pose for the financial system and international cooperation on financial stability.
I will do so in the context of a report that the Financial Stability Board—the FSB—published last week, evaluating the progress we have made in addressing the too-big-to-fail problem for banks.
The evaluation has relevant and timely things to say about the resilience of banks, and the financial system more generally, during this time.
The COVID Event: An Unprecedented Policy Response to an Unprecedented Economic Shock
The containment measures of the COVID event represent the biggest test that the financial system has faced since the global financial crisis of 2007-08.
After years of reforms, we now face a real life stress test even more severe than those previously hypothesized.
But unlike the global financial crisis, this shock originated from outside the financial system.
The first phase of the impact of the COVID event on the financial system was the market turmoil we experienced in March.
This was the result of severe uncertainty triggering major re-pricing and volatility in global financial markets, disrupting the flow of credit to the economy.
We saw many examples of a "dash for cash," with firms drawing down their lines of credit with banks, and the indiscriminate sale of assets by investors in order to obtain liquidity.
The policy response by central banks and governments to this liquidity shock was rapid and decisive.
The authorities worked together to address the problem through a combination of monetary, fiscal, and regulatory measures.
Credit spreads have narrowed for both investment-grade and high-yield bonds, markets are functioning in an orderly manner, and credit provision to the economy has held up.
According to the latest International Monetary Fund forecast, the global economy is projected to contract sharply by 4.9 percent in 2020, a much worse outcome than during the 2007–08 financial crisis.
Banks entered the current crisis in a much stronger position than they did the global financial crisis.
This is a direct outcome of the G20 regulatory reforms adopted in the aftermath of that crisis and measures taken by the banking industry, which have improved the resilience of the core of the financial system.
This has allowed the banking system to absorb rather than amplify the current macroeconomic shock.
It has also enabled banks to play a central role in measures to support the flow of credit to the economy.
A number of stress tests carried out recently in FSB jurisdictions have confirmed that banks are able to continue lending even in the face of this extreme shock.
Less than two weeks ago, we at the Federal Reserve concluded that our banks would generally remain well capitalized under a range of extremely harsh hypothetical downside scenarios stemming from the COVID event.
Even with that demonstrated strength, however—given the high levels of uncertainty—we took a number of prudent steps to help conserve the capital in the banking system.
We know that the financial system will face more challenges.
The official sector is providing a rapid and coordinated response to support the real economy, maintain financial stability, and minimize the risk of market fragmentation.
The FSB is overseeing international cooperation and coordination of the responses of financial authorities to the COVID event.
Too-Big-to-Fail Reforms Have Made Banks More Resilient and Able to Support the Economy
Nevertheless, a number of its conclusions are relevant to policymakers and market participants in the current situation.
We should first cast our minds back to the global financial crisis.
In 2010 Mervyn King, the then Governor the Bank of England, noted that "most large complex financial institutions are global—at least in life if not in death." In this pithy sentence, he summed up the challenge policymakers faced.
Decades of bank expansion and cross-border integration had provided many economic and social benefits, such as the ability to finance global supply chains.
When big banks ran into trouble during the financial crisis, regulators faced a stark choice: disorderly failure or taxpayer-funded bailouts.
The problem before: The market had assumed that banks would not be allowed to fail.
Banks and their creditors did not bear all the downside risk, and so they took on too much risk.
The problem after: Authorities did not have the capacity to resolve a failing large international bank and were compelled to rescue banks at a significant cost to the taxpayer.
Drawing on the lessons from the crisis, the G20 Leaders endorsed a package of reforms to tackle these two problems for systemically important banks.
Standards for additional loss absorbency through capital surcharges and total loss-absorbing capacity requirements;
I mentioned earlier that banks have entered this crisis in a position of strength.
For global systemically important banks—G‑SIBs—tier 1 capital ratios have doubled since 2011 to 14 percent.
But the too-big-to-fail evaluation also finds that the capital surcharges for systemically important banks have contributed to enhanced resilience.
Moreover, banks in advanced economies have built up significant loss-absorbing and recapitalization capacity by issuing instruments that can bear losses in the event of resolution.
Supervisors and firms are better equipped to deal with problems that occur.
Supervisory oversight of systemically important banks has learned the lessons of the crisis and has added a macroprudential perspective.
The Basel III framework introduced additional capital and liquidity buffers, which are intended to be usable in a downturn to help maintain the flow of credit to the real economy.
Before the global financial crisis, the resolution of failing banks was a niche subject.
This was the main reason why authorities had so few options for our global systemic banks in the middle of the crisis.
And resolution frameworks provide these authorities with the powers to resolve a systemically important bank in a manner that maintains financial stability and reduces taxpayer exposure.
The FSB's evaluation shows that investors increasingly expect failing banks to be resolved rather than bailed out.
The funding cost advantages enjoyed by systemically important banks have fallen.
Market prices suggest that investors are now pricing the risk of having losses imposed on them in the event of a bank failure.
For most jurisdictions that are home to G-SIBs, credit rating agencies no longer assume governments will bail them out.
This additional information has already proved helpful to both banks and authorities during the pandemic.
Taken together, these resilience and resolution reforms lower the probability of banks failing, reduce the consequences and costs of a bank failure, and provide additional options for dealing with failing banks that simply did not exist before the global financial crisis.
Reforms Are Achieving Their Policy Objectives But More Work Is Needed
We have to ask ourselves, however, whether we have addressed the problem set out by Mervyn King in the wake of the global financial crisis.
Can authorities now resolve complex international banks without recourse to public funds, while maintaining financial stability? And does the coordinated international approach we have now adopted provide for effective resolution of banks, by ensuring that while they are global in life, we also have a global solution in death?
We are moving to a world in which G-SIBs can be global in life and orderly in death.
All FSB jurisdictions need to implement resolution reforms and to improve their resolution capabilities so they are fully prepared to respond to a bank failure or a crisis.
The FSB's evaluation shows that systemically important banks remain very complex, highlighting the importance of resolution planning.
The FSB continues its work to ensure that banks, other financial institutions and market infrastructures can be effectively and safely resolved.
The FSB's monitoring shows that the share of bank assets as a percentage of total financial assets has dropped from 46 percent in 2008 to 39 percent in 2018.
As non-bank financial institutions increase their market share, risks have moved outside the banking system.
The market turmoil in March underlines the need to better understand the risks in non-bank financial intermediation and reap the benefits of this dynamic part of the financial system without undermining financial stability.
At the FSB, we established earlier this year a balanced working group of bank and nonbank authorities to look closely and concretely at these issues, and the COVID event has given focus and vitality to this effort.
Separately, we have already announced that our next evaluation will examine the post-crisis reforms to money market funds, which were once again front and center in the COVID event.
This will also provide us with additional evidence on how banks have responded to the pandemic and any lessons learned for our evaluation.

At "Building a Resilient Workforce," a video conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Youngstown, Ohio (via webcast)
They give context to reams of data and definition to a huge and complex economic picture.
Feedback from our Investing in America's Workforce initiative found a pronounced need for workforce and economic development programs to more closely align, for instance.
The pandemic has again exposed a range of troubling inequalities, most of them of long standing.
As the national discussion continues, it is critical to remember that equity includes access to education, work, and economic opportunity.
King delivered his "I Have a Dream" speech, just a few short blocks from the Federal Reserve, at a rally whose full title was the March on Washington for Jobs and Freedom.
Before the virus swept across the globe, the American economy was in a good place.
We were experiencing the longest expansion on record, and unemployment had reached historic lows.
That economic good fortune had eluded pockets across the country, including Youngstown.
A particular cruelty of the pandemic has been its disproportionate effects on many areas that were already suffering.
But given the opportunity, I'll always bet on the American people and on the kind of community resolve and dedication we're hearing about today.

Thank you for the opportunity to again address this group, which has played such an important role encouraging diversity, and a diversity of perspectives, in housing and finance.
Today, I'd like to talk to you about how banking regulation and supervision is adjusting to the unprecedented economic challenges posed by the coronavirus outbreak and especially the containment measures taken in response, which together we call the "COVID event." In particular, I will discuss how the COVID event is affecting a cornerstone of the Federal Reserve's oversight of large banks—our periodic stress tests, which verify that banks are prepared to deal with severe economic and financial conditions.
Although our stress tests were not designed to test specifically against the effects of the COVID event on the economy and on our banks, they were designed to be flexible.
I will describe modifications we've made to the stress test process this year, including expansions in stress testing appropriate to the unique circumstances we face, and preview our approach to the results the Fed will release next week.
Let me start with some more general background on stress tests, among other steps the Federal Reserve Board has taken since the 2007-2009 financial crisis to strengthen the financial system and increase its resiliency.
Since the financial crisis, we have mandated a substantial increase in the quantity and quality of capital in the banking system, including specially targeted higher capital requirements for the largest banks critical to overall financial stability.
Capital provides a cushion to ensure that banks are prepared to face financial stress and other unexpected circumstances.
Our requirements include capital buffers that are designed to be drawn down in periods of stress, in addition to minimum capital requirements.
We have also established periodic stress tests to examine how banks would respond to hypothetical adverse financial and economic conditions.
The Fed took these steps so that, during a crisis, banks would be in a position of strength and would not be forced to curtail lending to preserve capital, which would only worsen the crisis.
In early March, in a move unrelated to the COVID event, the Board simplified its capital rules by finalizing a stress capital buffer requirement.
This new framework uses our stress tests to set capital requirements for large banks and has the same goal as the previous framework: using forward-looking analysis to help ensure that banks have sufficient capital to survive a severe recession while still being able to lend to households and businesses.1
This year, as every year, the stress test began in February with the publication of a hypothetical scenario.
This scenario, however, predated the serious economic effects of the COVID event, which began in March.
This timing presented challenges and demanded changes to our usual process, and we responded with an approach that required more extensive analysis than normal.
We simply would not have been doing our jobs if we had just run the test using a scenario framed before the economy began to deteriorate in March.
One reason for changing course hearkens back to the first stress test in 2009, the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, or SCAP.
One goal was to provide information, transparency and market discipline.
In that sense, ever since then stress testing has acted to stabilize and strengthen the financial system, and it is this ongoing benefit that would be put at risk if we failed to alter our approach to make it relevant to the unique circumstances we face.
While the first test likewise was conducted during a crisis, the current situation is unlike what we have faced in subsequent stress tests.
In normal circumstances, we can take our time to carefully examine data and make a deliberate judgement about the capital planning of banks.
We didn't have the time or the comprehensive data to run a complete and updated COVID event stress test.
We use data that banks submit around six weeks after the end of each quarter, so the test we run beginning in April normally uses data submitted in February and March reflecting bank balance sheets as of December.
We also normally ask banks to complete their own stress tests using our scenarios before we begin our stress test.
Another consideration was preserving the forward-looking benefits of stress tests.
As we weighed how to proceed on this year's stress testing process, it was clear that the starting point was a lot less important than the considerable uncertainty we continue to face about the course of the COVID event and thus the path of the recovery.
We are calling this forward-looking approach a sensitivity analysis, and now I'll try to explain how that differs from a focus on just one severely adverse scenario.
Based on past experience and our standing policies, our February scenario assumed stress in corporate debt and real estate markets, among other details, and an increase in unemployment considerably larger than occurred in the Great Recession.
Compared to what we are now experiencing, this scenario was less severe than the unprecedented drop in employment and output in the second quarter of 2020 but more severe than the extent of stress we're seeing in debt markets.
There's probably never been more uncertainty about the economic outlook.
Although our policies on stress testing emphasize the value of not increasing capital requirements under stress and thus exacerbating a downturn, our first priority must be—and is—to understand the implications of quite plausible downside scenarios from our current position for bank capital.
In light of that uncertainty, our sensitivity analysis considers three distinct downside risk paths for the economy:
first, a rapid V-shaped recovery that regains much of the output and employment lost by the end of this year;
second, a slower, more U-shaped recovery in which only a small share of lost output and employment is regained in 2020;
Let me emphasize that these are not forecasts by the Fed or me, only plausible scenarios that span the range of where many private forecasters think the economy could be headed.
While using the same models as our regular stress tests, our sensitivity analysis is different from our normal use of a severely adverse scenario in several ways.
First, there are three possible paths instead of one because we must consider this range of outcomes.
While we retained the basic structure of the February 2020 scenario, we swapped out a few key variables such as the unemployment rate, change in economic output, and Treasury bill rates.
We also didn't follow our scenario design policy statement in formulating these three alternative paths.
We chose rough approximations of economic paths rather than detailed scenarios, which means that the usual set of detailed variable data that we use will not be available.
Finally, the analysis is still based on year-end 2019 data but with targeted adjustments to account for the most material changes to banks' balance sheets in the first quarter related to the COVID event, such as sizeable credit-line drawdowns by corporations.
Given the changing economic circumstances and the need to act quickly, we didn't publish these three economic paths in advance and ask banks to model their exposures to them.
The targeted adjustments to banks' balance sheets include the substantial growth in corporate loan balances and stress on borrowers in certain industry sectors that are most exposed to a sharp drop in demand.
Although we didn't run our full stress test on these three possible downside risk paths for the economy, and while our adjustments only capture the most material changes in balance sheets since last year, this sensitivity analysis has helped sharpen our understanding of how banks may fare in the wide range of possible outcomes.
We think it makes the most sense to share with the public some of what we have learned when we publish the results of our stress testing process on Thursday of next week.
First, as a point of reference, we will disclose stress test results using the February 2020 scenario, run against bank exposures as of December 2019.
To be more precise, this portion of our disclosure, based on the results of the February 2020 scenario, will be identical in all material ways to last year's stress test disclosure.
This approach provides continuity and comparability with past stress tests.
For the sensitivity analysis, we will provide key details about the three downside risk paths for the economy and targeted adjustments.
We will also provide results aggregated across banks that will compare how the banking system as a whole would fare under the three distinct views of the future.
Because of the limitations I described in examining the three downside risk paths for the economy, our disclosure of the sensitivity analysis will not provide firm-specific results.
This adapted stress test, based on December 2019 exposures, will still give detailed information about the vulnerabilities of firms to the range of stresses that may play out.
As a next step, we plan to move ahead and provide all banks subject to stress testing with a stress capital buffer requirement based on the February 2020 scenario, under our new approach integrating stress testing with capital requirements.
Our new framework for establishing capital requirements was calibrated based on the assumption that we would set these requirements using a full stress test based on published scenarios.
And, as I noted earlier, we kept in mind the principle that if possible we should avoid measures that tighten minimum capital levels during a crisis, to avoid intensifying that crisis.
Let me take a minute to explain how and when we will disclose those stress capital buffer requirements.
In prior years, the results from Dodd-Frank Act stress tests and the related Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review were released over a two-week period.
We are able to do this because the new capital framework uses the results of the stress tests to establish the size of banks' stress capital buffers, which they can draw down in times of stress, and allows the banks to adjust their capital plans after receiving those results.
By giving the firms their effective capital buffer requirement for the coming year and allowing them to adjust their capital plans to that buffer, the change will result in a more thoughtful assessment of risks.
Once the banks have determined their final capital plans, the Board will publicly release the final capital requirements for each individual firm later this year, before they take effect in the fourth quarter, as planned.2
In addition, given the special circumstances this year we will use the results of our sensitivity analysis to inform our overall stance on capital distributions and in ongoing bank supervision.
The sensitivity analysis will help us judge whether banks would have enough capital if economic and financial conditions were to worsen.
As I have noted, our largest banks entered the COVID event in a position of strength, with high levels of capital and liquidity, and they have demonstrated that strength in the support they have provided to the economy during a crisis.
In addition, I will note that almost all of our large banks have suspended share repurchases for the second quarter.
In light of the ongoing economic uncertainty, I consider this move for the second quarter a prudent step as a very substantial capital conservation measure.
Before the COVID event over 70 percent of the capital distributions of global systemically important banks, for example, came in form of share repurchases, which ceased in March.
The sensitivity analysis will help the Board assess whether additional measures are advisable for certain banks or certain future developments.
Let me conclude by reiterating that stress tests remain a valuable tool, even in this time of extreme uncertainty.
Our use of the sensitivity analysis is an acknowledgement that the path ahead is unusually uncertain, but that the work of verifying the resiliency of banks must continue, to aid the recovery by bolstering public confidence in the financial system.
The new stress capital buffer framework will likewise aid capital planning and risk management by banks, leaving them better prepared to maintain lending to households and businesses.
We will closely monitor the condition of these banks and the broader financial system in the coming months, including through additional COVID-related analysis.
We will not hesitate to take additional policy actions should they be warranted under the then-prevailing economic conditions.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Supervision and Regulation Report (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, May 2020).
Some banks may determine that they are required, for purposes of compliance with the securities laws, to publicly disclose their stress capital buffer requirement before the Board publicly releases this information later in the year.
In order to give all banks subject to this year's exercise sufficient time to understand their stress test results and make any necessary changes to their capital plans, we expect banks to wait until after U.S.
markets close on June 29, 2020, to publicly disclose any information about their planned capital actions and stress capital buffer requirements.

It is my pleasure to meet virtually this evening with the members and invited guests of the Foreign Policy Association (FPA).1 I am truly honored to receive the Foreign Policy Association Medal.
Past honorees have included Sheila Bair, Anne-Marie Slaughter, Paul Volcker, Jean-Claude Trichet, and my Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) colleague John Williams—and so with this award, I am indeed in select company.
While the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has taken a tragic human toll measured in terms of lives lost and suffering inflicted, the pandemic has also inflicted a heavy toll on the levels of activity and employment in the U.S.
Real gross domestic product (GDP) declined at a 5 percent annual rate in the first quarter of the year and will almost surely continue to contract at an unprecedented pace in the second quarter.
The unemployment rate, which reached a 50-year low of 3.5 percent as recently as February of this year, surged to 14.7 percent in April, an 80-year high.
In May, there was a notable rebound in employment and decline in unemployment, and these developments are certainly welcome.
But activity in many parts of the economy has yet to pick up, and GDP is falling deeply below its recent peak.
And, of course, despite the improvements seen in the May jobs report, the unemployment rate, at 13.3 percent, remains historically high.
After the extreme turbulence witnessed in March, financial markets across many sectors have normalized and are again serving their essential role of intermediating flows of savings and investment among borrowers and lenders.
Bank credit lines are providing liquidity to companies, and corporations with debt rated investment grade and high yield are able to issue, and in size, in the corporate bond market.
I believe—and most outside observers agree—that this easing of financial conditions since March is, at least in part, the direct consequence of economic policy responses to the crisis, including the actions the Federal Reserve took at our March 15 meeting and the subsequent announcement and sequential launch of 11 new facilities to support the flow of credit to households and companies.
While this easing of financial conditions is, of course, welcome to the extent that it supports the flow of credit to households and firms during this challenging period, it may not prove to be durable, depending on the course that the coronavirus contagion takes and the duration of the recession that it causes.
At minimum, the easing of financial conditions is buying some time until the economy begins to recover.
As I speak to you today, there is extraordinary uncertainty about both the depth and the duration of the economic downturn.
Because the course of the economy will depend on the course of the virus and the public health policies put in place to mitigate and contain it, there is an unusually wide range of scenarios for the evolution of the economy that could plausibly play out over the next several years.
In my baseline view, while I do believe it will likely take some time for economic activity and the labor market to fully recover from the pandemic shock, I do project right now that the economy will resume growth starting in the third quarter.
Moreover, I judge that measures of longer-term inflation expectations were, when the downturn began, at the low end of a range that I consider consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective and, given the likely depth of this downturn, are at risk of falling below that range.
The Federal Reserve has a dual mandate from the Congress to pursue policies that aim to achieve and sustain maximum employment and price stability.
To me, price stability requires that inflation expectations remain well anchored at our 2 percent objective, and I will place a high priority on advocating policies that will be directed at achieving not only maximum employment, but also well-anchored inflation expectations consistent with our 2 percent objective.
At the Federal Reserve, we take our dual-mandate obligations of maximum employment and price stability very seriously, and, since March 3, we have deployed our entire toolkit to provide critical support to the economy during this challenging time.
In two unscheduled meetings, we voted on March 3 and March 15 to cut the target range for the federal funds rate by a total of 150 basis points to its current range of 0 to 25 basis points.2 In our FOMC statements, we have indicated we expect to maintain the target range at this level until we are confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
On March 16, we launched a program to purchase Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities in whatever amounts needed to support smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions.
To date, these purchases have totaled more than $2.3 trillion, and, as we indicated at our June meeting, they will continue in coming months at least at the current pace, which should sustain smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions.
Since March 17, the Board has announced the establishment of no fewer than 11 new facilities to support the flow of credit to households and businesses.
These programs are authorized under emergency lending powers granted to the Fed under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act and are available only in "unusual and exigent" circumstances and with the consent of the Secretary of Treasury.3 These facilities are supported with money invested by the Department of the Treasury, drawing on appropriations of more than $450 billion authorized by the Congress in the CARES Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) for the specific purpose of investing in Fed programs to sustain the flow of credit to households, firms, and communities during the coronavirus pandemic.
With these facilities, we are providing a bridge by stepping in and supporting lending throughout the economy until the recovery takes hold.
These programs are designed to offer backstop sources of funding to the private sector, and just the announcement that these backstop facilities would soon be launched appears to have bolstered confidence in capital markets, allowing many companies to finance themselves privately even before the facilities were up and running.
When that day comes and we are confident the economy is solidly on the road to recovery, we will wind down these lending facilities at such time as we determine the circumstances we confront are no longer unusual or exigent.
The Federal Reserve has played a leading role in the global economic policy response to the coronavirus pandemic.
In globally integrated financial markets such as ours, these strains in dollar funding markets outside the United States affect the flow of credit to U.S.
As such, during the week of March 15, the Federal Reserve coordinated with five foreign central banks to enhance its standing dollar liquidity swap lines.4 In addition, temporary swap lines were reestablished with the nine central banks that had temporary agreements during the Global Financial Crisis.5 Moreover, to support dollar liquidity to a broad range of countries, the Federal Reserve announced a new program on March 31, the temporary FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility.
Under this facility, FIMA account holders at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York (which include central banks and other monetary authorities) can enter into overnight repos (repurchase agreements) with the Federal Reserve, temporarily exchanging U.S.
dollars, which can then be provided to institutions in their respective jurisdictions.
All of these facilities have had a very constructive effect in calming down dollar funding markets and supporting a return to more normal conditions in global financial markets more generally.
Of course, as members of the FPA, you are well aware that developments in the U.S.
economy do not happen in isolation from the rest of the world.
With COVID-19, all countries have been hit by a global common shock, not only directly by the virus and the measures necessary to combat it, but also by the economic spillovers from those actions around the world.
As in the United States, many foreign authorities have taken swift and forceful actions in response.
My colleagues and I have worked closely with others—bilaterally and in international forums like the Group of Seven, Group of Twenty, Bank for International Settlements, and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development—to monitor and address the effects of the pandemic.
The forcefulness and synchronized timing of actions by fiscal authorities, central banks, and regulators have helped support the incomes of households and firms and reduce market stresses that could have amplified the shock.
Not only is the Federal Reserve using its full range of tools to support the economy through this challenging time, but our policies will also help ensure that the rebound in activity when it commences will be as robust as possible.
That said, it is important to note that the Fed's statutory authority grants us lending powers, not spending powers.
The Fed is not authorized to grant money to particular beneficiaries, to meet the payroll expenses of small businesses, or to underwrite the unemployment benefits of displaced workers.
Direct fiscal support for the economy is thus also essential to sustain economic activity and complement what monetary policy cannot accomplish on its own.
Direct fiscal support can make a critical difference, not just in helping families and businesses stay afloat in a time of need, but also in sustaining the productive capacity of the economy after we emerge from this downturn.
Fortunately, the fiscal policy response in the United States to the coronavirus shock has been both robust and timely.
Depending on the course of the virus and the course of the economy, more support from both fiscal and monetary policy may be called for.
The coronavirus pandemic poses the most serious threat to maximum employment and, potentially, to price stability that the United States has faced in our lifetimes.
There is much that policymakers—and epidemiologists—simply do not know right now about the potential course that the virus, and thus the economy, will take.
But there is one thing that I am certain about: The Federal Reserve will continue to act forcefully, proactively, and aggressively as we deploy our toolkit—including our balance sheet, forward guidance, and lending facilities—to provide critical support to the economy during this challenging time and to do all we can to make sure that the recovery from this downturn, once it commences, is as robust as possible.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
I am grateful to Brian Doyle and Chiara Scotti of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance in preparing this text.
The swap fee was reduced from 50 basis points to 25 basis points over the U.S.
To better target stresses in funding markets for longer-term dollar borrowing, swap operations with a maturity of 84 days were added to the usual 7-day operations by the four central banks that traditionally hold regular auctions—the Bank of England, the Bank of Japan, the European Central Bank, and the Swiss National Bank.
Finally, these four central banks announced that they would begin daily auctions.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "Coordinated Central Bank Action to Enhance the Provision of U.S.
Dollar Liquidity," press release, March 15; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "Coordinated Central Bank Action to Further Enhance the Provision of U.S.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "Federal Reserve Announces the Establishment of Temporary U.S.
Dollar Liquidity Arrangements with Other Central Banks," press release, March 19.

Introductory remarks for the Fed Listens panel on the COVID-19 pandemic
At “A Fed Listens Event: How Is COVID-19 Affecting Your Community?,” sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C., (via webcast)
This will be the 15th Fed Listens event the Federal Reserve has conducted over 16 months.
We have listened to diverse voices from every type of community in every sector and every district of our country.
This rich set of perspectives is helping bring alive for us the importance of the review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices led by Vice Chair Richard Clarida.
We have heard that maximum employment is not captured in a single national average, it brings vital benefits, and it takes a very long time to arrive in many neighborhoods.
We have heard that inflation matters: Households at different life stages and in different places are balancing the cost of living against their earnings, while businesses are balancing wages and other costs against their pricing power.
We have heard that access to credit matters, and that it is important to use the full range of tools to support the economy.
Last year, national unemployment had fallen to its lowest point in over five decades.
Today, unemployment has surged to levels not seen since the Great Depression.
Today, the fallout from the COVID pandemic has cruelly hit groups with thinner financial cushions the hardest—workers in the lowest quarter of earnings, people of color, low and moderate income communities, and women disproportionately employed in services jobs.
As we think about how the Federal Reserve's tools and presence in communities around the country could best provide stability at this trying time and strong support for the recovery to come, we are turning again to many of the same voices we heard from earlier to learn how the COVID pandemic has affected your communities and what lies ahead.

At "A Fed Listens Event: How Is COVID-19 Affecting Your Community?," sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C.
We've held many Fed Listens events over the past 16 months, and it's important to note that these conversations aren't just a nice way to talk to people from around the country, although they are that.
You give us perspective on the economic realities that don't show up on a spreadsheet.
You help us see those complex sets of data that analyze the American economy through the eyes of the people, businesses, and communities that make up the American economy.
And that information is very helpful to us as we make our policy decisions.
The Reserve Banks are also continuing to host conversations in communities across the country to help capture economic realities on the ground.
We are in the midst of an economic downturn without modern precedent.
In the best of times, predicting the path of the economy with any certainty is difficult.
John Kenneth Galbraith famously said that economic forecasting exists to make astrology look respectable.
We are now experiencing a whole new level of uncertainty, as questions only the virus can answer complicate the outlook.
Policies that address the resumption of economic activity are the province of elected officials at all levels of government, in close consultation with public health and medical professionals.
From an economic perspective, we hope to learn a lot from your experiences and from what you're hearing from your colleagues, customers, and communities: How they're coping with that uncertainty now, how they're thinking about a future that's harder to plan for, and what matters most as they navigate the path.
The feedback we get from our community and business contacts has always been crucial in how we conduct monetary policy.

It is my pleasure to meet virtually with you today at the New York Association for Business Economics.1 I have been looking forward to this session, and I am sorry that I cannot join you in person, as I always value my opportunities for dialogue with business and market economists.
Since mid-March, along with my Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) colleagues, I have been working from home.
While the coronavirus (COVID-19) pandemic has taken a tragic human toll measured in terms of lives lost and suffering inflicted, as a direct result of the necessary public health policies put in place to mitigate and control the spread of the virus, the pandemic has also inflicted a heavy toll on the levels of activity and employment in the U.S.
Real gross domestic product (GDP) declined at a 4.8 percent annual rate in the first quarter of the year and will almost surely continue to contract at an unprecedented pace in the second quarter.
The unemployment rate, which was at a 50‑year low of 3.5 percent as recently as February, surged in April by more than 10 percentage points to 14.7 percent, an 80-year high, and it is likely to rise further in May.
But while the economic news has been unremittingly awful in recent weeks, financial conditions since the middle of March have eased—and considerably so in many markets.
I believe—and most outside observers agree—that this easing of financial conditions is, at least in part, a direct consequence of the actions the Federal Reserve took at our March 15 meeting, the subsequent announcements over the following days of the creation of nine new credit facilities to support the flow of credit to households and companies, the robust expansion of our existing foreign exchange swap arrangements with major foreign central banks, and the establishment of a new FIMA (Foreign and International Monetary Authorities) Repo Facility with potential eligibility for a broad range of countries.2 While this easing of financial conditions is, of course, welcome, whether it proves to be durable will depend importantly on the course that the coronavirus contagion takes and the duration of the downturn that it causes.
At a minimum, the easing of financial conditions is buying some time until the economy can begin to recover, growth resumes, and unemployment begins to fall.
As I speak to you today, there is extraordinary uncertainty about both the depth and the duration of the economic downturn.
Because the course of the economy will depend on the course of the virus and the public health policies put in place to mitigate and contain it, there is an unusually wide range of scenarios for the evolution of the economy that could plausibly play out over the next several years.
In my baseline view, while I do believe it will likely take some time for economic activity and the labor market to fully recover from the pandemic shock, I do project right now that the economy will begin to grow and that the unemployment rate will begin to decline starting in the second half of this year.
Moreover, as I have indicated previously, I judge that measures of longer-term inflation expectations were, when the downturn began, at the low end of a range that I consider consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.
At the Federal Reserve, we take our dual-mandate obligations of maximum employment and price stability very seriously, and, since March 3, we have deployed our entire toolkit to provide critical support to the economy during this challenging time.
In two unscheduled meetings, we voted on March 3 and 15 to cut the target range for the federal funds rate by a total of 150 basis points to its current range of 0 to 25 basis points.
In our FOMC statements, we have indicated we expect to maintain the target range at this level until we are confident that the economy has weathered recent events and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
On March 16, we launched a program to purchase Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities in whatever amounts needed to support smooth market functioning, thereby fostering effective transmission of monetary policy to broader financial conditions.
To date, these purchases have totaled more than $2 trillion, and, as we indicated following our April FOMC meeting, they are continuing but at a reduced pace, reflecting the substantial improvement in market functioning that has occurred since the program was launched two months ago.
Since March 17, the Federal Reserve Board has announced the establishment of no fewer than nine new facilities to support the flow of credit to households and businesses.
These programs are authorized under emergency lending powers granted to the Fed under section 13(3) of the Federal Reserve Act and are available only in "unusual and exigent" circumstances and with the consent of the Secretary of Treasury.3 I think you will agree that today we face circumstances that are both exigent and unusual.
These facilities are supported with money invested by the Department of the Treasury, drawing on appropriations of more than $450 billion authorized by the Congress in the Cares Act (Coronavirus Aid, Relief, and Economic Security Act) for the specific purpose of investing in Fed programs to sustain the flow of credit to households, firms, and communities during the coronavirus pandemic.
With these facilities, we are providing a bridge by stepping in and supporting lending throughout the economy until the recovery takes hold.
These programs are designed to offer backstop sources of funding to the private sector, and just the announcement that these backstop facilities would soon be launched appears to have bolstered confidence in capital markets, allowing many companies to finance themselves privately even before the facilities were up and running.
When that day comes and we are confident the economy is solidly on the road to recovery, we will wind down these lending facilities at such time as we determine the circumstances we confront are no longer unusual or exigent.
Not only is the Federal Reserve using its full range of tools to support the economy through this challenging time, but our policies will also help ensure that the rebound in activity when it commences will be as robust as possible.
That said, it is important to note that the Fed's statutory authority grants us lending powers, not spending powers.
The Fed is not authorized to grant money to particular beneficiaries, to meet the payroll expenses of small businesses, or to underwrite the unemployment benefits of displaced workers.
Direct fiscal support for the economy is thus also essential to sustain economic activity and complement what monetary policy cannot accomplish on its own.
Direct fiscal support can make a critical difference, not just in helping families and businesses stay afloat in a time of need, but also in sustaining the productive capacity of the economy after we emerge from this downturn.
Fortunately, the fiscal policy response in the United States to the coronavirus shock has been both robust and timely.
This total includes nearly $700 billion for the Paycheck Protection Program to support worker retention at small companies and more than $450 billion for the U.S.
Treasury to provide first-loss equity funding for the Fed credit facilities that I discussed earlier.
While the scale, scope, and timing of the monetary and fiscal policy responses to the coronavirus pandemic are unprecedented and will certainly cushion the blow the shock inflicts on the economy, the shock is severe.
Depending on the course the virus takes and the depth and duration of the downturn it causes, additional support from both monetary and fiscal policies may be called for.
The coronavirus pandemic poses the most serious threat to maximum employment and, potentially, to price stability that the United States has faced in our lifetimes.
There is much that policymakers—and epidemiologists—simply do not know right now about the potential course that the virus, and thus the economy, will take.
But there is one thing that I am certain about: The Federal Reserve will continue to act forcefully, proactively, and aggressively as we deploy our toolkit—including our balance sheet, forward guidance, and lending facilities—to provide critical support to the economy during this challenging time and to do all we can to make sure that the recovery from this downturn, once it commences, is as robust as possible.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
I am grateful to Chiara Scotti of the Federal Reserve Board staff for her assistance in preparing this text.
For additional information on the Federal Reserve actions taken at the March 15 FOMC meeting, see the meeting statement, which is available (along with statements from other FOMC meetings) on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.
More details about the new credit facilities, the expansion of foreign exchange swap arrangements, and the FIMA Repo Facility, as well as other regulatory actions, can be found on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/covid-19.htm.
Discussion with Vice Chair Clarida on the U.S Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy

The coronavirus has left a devastating human and economic toll in its wake as it has spread around the globe.
So have the legions of other essential workers who put themselves at risk every day on our behalf.
As a nation, we have temporarily withdrawn from many kinds of economic and social activity to help slow the spread of the virus.
Some sectors of the economy have been effectively closed since mid-March.
We are seeing a severe decline in economic activity and in employment, and already the job gains of the past decade have been erased.
Since the pandemic arrived in force just two months ago, more than 20 million people have lost their jobs.
A Fed survey being released tomorrow reflects findings similar to many others: Among people who were working in February, almost 40 percent of those in households making less than $40,000 a year had lost a job in March.1 This reversal of economic fortune has caused a level of pain that is hard to capture in words, as lives are upended amid great uncertainty about the future.
Earlier in the post– World War II period, recessions were sometimes linked to a cycle of high inflation followed by Fed tightening.2 The lower inflation levels of recent decades have brought a series of long expansions, often accompanied by the buildup of imbalances over time—asset prices that reached unsupportable levels, for instance, or important sectors of the economy, such as housing, that boomed unsustainably.
Today I will briefly discuss the measures taken so far to offset the economic effects of the virus, and the path ahead.
The response here in the United States has been particularly swift and forceful.
While the coronavirus economic shock appears to be the largest on record, the fiscal response has also been the fastest and largest response for any postwar downturn.
After rapidly cutting the federal funds rate to close to zero, we took a wide array of additional measures to facilitate the flow of credit in the economy, which can be grouped into four areas.
First, outright purchases of Treasuries and agency mortgage-backed securities to restore functionality in these critical markets.
Second, liquidity and funding measures, including discount window measures, expanded swap lines with foreign central banks, and several facilities with Treasury backing to support smooth functioning in money markets.
Third, with additional backing from the Treasury, facilities to more directly support the flow of credit to households, businesses, and state and local governments.
And fourth, temporary regulatory adjustments to encourage and allow banks to expand their balance sheets to support their household and business customers.
For example, our authority to extend credit directly to private nonfinancial businesses and state and local governments exists only in "unusual and exigent circumstances" and with the consent of the Secretary of the Treasury.
While the economic response has been both timely and appropriately large, it may not be the final chapter, given that the path ahead is both highly uncertain and subject to significant downside risks.
Economic forecasts are uncertain in the best of times, and today the virus raises a new set of questions: How quickly and sustainably will it be brought under control? Can new outbreaks be avoided as social-distancing measures lapse? How long will it take for confidence to return and normal spending to resume? And what will be the scope and timing of new therapies, testing, or a vaccine? The answers to these questions will go a long way toward setting the timing and pace of the economic recovery.
The overall policy response to date has provided a measure of relief and stability, and will provide some support to the recovery when it comes.
The record shows that deeper and longer recessions can leave behind lasting damage to the productive capacity of the economy.3 Avoidable household and business insolvencies can weigh on growth for years to come.
Long stretches of unemployment can damage or end workers' careers as their skills lose value and professional networks dry up, and leave families in greater debt.4 The loss of thousands of small- and medium-sized businesses across the country would destroy the life's work and family legacy of many business and community leaders and limit the strength of the recovery when it comes.
These businesses are a principal source of job creation—something we will sorely need as people seek to return to work.
A prolonged recession and weak recovery could also discourage business investment and expansion, further limiting the resurgence of jobs as well as the growth of capital stock and the pace of technological advancement.
The result could be an extended period of low productivity growth and stagnant incomes.
We ought to do what we can to avoid these outcomes, and that may require additional policy measures.
At the Fed, we will continue to use our tools to their fullest until the crisis has passed and the economic recovery is well under way.
But the recovery may take some time to gather momentum, and the passage of time can turn liquidity problems into solvency problems.
Additional fiscal support could be costly, but worth it if it helps avoid long-term economic damage and leaves us with a stronger recovery.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S.
"Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 12.
"Potential Output and Recessions: Are We Fooling Ourselves? (PDF)" International Finance Discussion Papers 1145.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.
"Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy," IMF Economic Review, vol.
"Does Monetary Policy Matter? A New Test in the Spirit of Friedman and Schwartz (PDF)," in Olivier J.
Also see the Federal Reserve's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (forthcoming) and its Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S.

At the "Investment Connection – Response to COVID-19: Colorado" webinar series hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri
As many of you are aware, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City started this initiative in 2011 with a goal of helping funders find community and economic development opportunities in the 10th District.
Investment Connection has attracted a wide range of proposals to meet community development needs, including asset building and financial education, community facilities, small business development/microlending, neighborhood stabilization/affordable housing, and workforce development.
Since its inception, seven additional Reserve Banks have held or plan to hold Investment Connection events in their respective districts.
The COVID-19 pandemic has created an economic and public health crisis, which has caused tremendous hardship, in particular for our most vulnerable communities.
The Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) is a powerful tool to bring stakeholders together to find solutions that serve the needs of low- and moderate-income communities.
To better understand what is happening on the ground, and how the Federal Reserve can use its full range of tools to address this crisis, it is important to hear from direct service providers.
I am proud that the Federal Reserve has been supporting your work, and we are always open to hearing how we can continue to do so going forward.

At the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, The Brookings Institution, Washington, D.C.
This is first and foremost a public health crisis, and the most important response is coming from those on the front lines in hospitals, emergency services, and care facilities.
We watch in collective awe and gratitude as these dedicated individuals put themselves at risk in service to others and to our nation.
People have been asked to put their lives and livelihoods on hold, at significant economic and personal cost.
We are moving with alarming speed from 50-year lows in unemployment to what will likely be very high, although temporary, levels.
The recently passed Cares Act is an important step in honoring that commitment, providing $2.2 trillion in relief to those who have lost their jobs, to low- and middle-income households, to employers of all sizes, to hospitals and health-care providers, and to state and local governments.
The Fed can also contribute in important ways: by providing a measure of relief and stability during this period of constrained economic activity, and by using our tools to ensure that the eventual recovery is as vigorous as possible.
To those ends, we have lowered interest rates to near zero in order to bring down borrowing costs.
We have also committed to keeping rates at this low level until we are confident that the economy has weathered the storm and is on track to achieve our maximum-employment and price-stability goals.
Even more importantly, we have acted to safeguard financial markets in order to provide stability to the financial system and support the flow of credit in the economy.
As a result of the economic dislocations caused by the virus, some essential financial markets had begun to sink into dysfunction, and many channels that households, businesses, and state and local governments rely on for credit had simply stopped working.
We acted forcefully to get our markets working again, and, as a result, market conditions have generally improved.
Many of the programs we are undertaking to support the flow of credit rely on emergency lending powers that are available only in very unusual circumstances—such as those we find ourselves in today—and only with the consent of the Secretary of the Treasury.
We will continue to use these powers forcefully, proactively, and aggressively until we are confident that we are solidly on the road to recovery.
I would stress that these are lending powers, not spending powers.
When the economy is well on its way back to recovery, and private markets and institutions are once again able to perform their vital functions of channeling credit and supporting economic growth, we will put these emergency tools away.
At the Fed, we are doing all we can to help shepherd the economy through this difficult time.
There is every reason to believe that the economic rebound, when it comes, can be robust.
We entered this turbulent period on a strong economic footing, and that should help support the recovery.
In the meantime, we are using our tools to help build a bridge from the solid economic foundation on which we entered this crisis to a position of regained economic strength on the other side.
I want to close by thanking the millions on the front lines: those working in health care, sanitation, transportation, grocery stores, warehouses, deliveries, security—including our own team at the Federal Reserve—and countless others.

Direction of Supervision: Impact of Payment System Innovation on Community Banks
At "Age of Advancement: The Intricacies of a Digital World" 2020 Banking Outlook Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Atlanta, Georgia
I appreciate the invitation to speak to you as part of this year's Banking Outlook Conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.1 I think this year's theme, Age of Advancement: The Intricacies of a Digital World, captures the dynamic and evolving landscape of our country's financial system well.
Advances in technology are occurring at a rapid pace and present the opportunity to make our financial system safer and more efficient for more Americans.
From faster payments to artificial intelligence, technological advancements touch nearly every aspect of our financial system and affect institutions of every type.
As the first Federal Reserve governor to serve in the role designated by Congress for someone with community banking experience, I am especially interested in the impact these kinds of advancements may have on community banks.
I am also committed to ensuring that as policymakers and supervisors navigate the intricacies of today's digital world, we do so in a way that considers the important role of community banks in cities and towns and rural communities across the country, and our nation's financial system more broadly.
To that end, I believe the Federal Reserve is well positioned to support innovation and the future of banking in a way that ensures our nation's evolving financial system works for community banks and the customers they serve.
So I would like to spend my time with you today focusing on how the Federal Reserve can achieve this objective in one specific area, that of our nation's payment system.
As many of you may know, before joining the Federal Reserve, I was a community banker and more recently had the privilege to serve as the Kansas State Bank Commissioner.
I have seen firsthand the vital role that our nation's community banks play in the financial industry and in the economy more broadly.
Through the services they provide, community banks help support strong cities, towns, and rural communities across the country, which are central to a vibrant economy.
For example, small business lending is an essential part of community bank portfolios.
Many community banks often specialize in serving small businesses, which account for the majority of new job creation in the country.2 In fact, community banks hold 48 percent of all loans to small businesses and farms in the United States.3
Community banks are also often seen by their customers as an important source of financial advice and a source of civic leadership.4 Community banks have a deep understanding of their local areas.
In many instances, community banks are also serving markets that tend to be neglected by larger banks.
These connections allow community banks to focus on specific local needs to provide a variety of services, which often include tailored and innovative products.
Payment services in particular are a key component of these relationships and are essential to the role of banks in their communities.
Community banks help ensure that consumers and businesses can safely and efficiently access and move their money.
By doing so, the payment services they provide act as the foundation for economic activities that help cities, towns, and rural communities grow and thrive, which in turn is essential to a strong and stable financial system.
A strong and stable financial system also depends on the smooth functioning of the nation's payment system.
Today, many Americans take the ability to move money across the country safely and efficiently for granted, but history shows that payment system disruptions can affect the economy more broadly.5 In the past, our nation's payment system was fragmented and inefficient, creating costs for consumers, merchants, banks, and, ultimately, the U.S.
For example, before the Federal Reserve was established, check clearing fees and banks' efforts to avoid them often led to circuitous check routing, with recipients facing long, unpredictable delays in receiving their money.
These kinds of inefficiencies were so significant that one of Congress's motivations in creating the Federal Reserve was ensuring a safe and efficient nationwide payment infrastructure.
Shortly after they opened for business, the Reserve Banks began providing a nationwide check collection service.
It also facilitated access to more-efficient payment services for banks across the nation.
Since then, the Federal Reserve has continued to support ongoing efficiency improvements in the nation's payment system, including the development of the Fedwire funds transfer system and the implementation of the automated clearinghouse, or ACH system, in partnership with the private sector.
This operational role has allowed the Federal Reserve to support the goal of a safe and efficient payment system throughout its history.
It has also contributed to widespread public confidence in the nation's payment infrastructure.
At times, the Federal Reserve has taken extraordinary steps to ensure the payment system can function reliably.
After planes were grounded on September 11, 2001, in the aftermath of the terrorist attacks in New York and Washington, D.C., the Federal Reserve arranged alternative transportation for millions of checks that normally would have moved across the country by plane.
The Federal Reserve also started giving immediate credit for all checks that it received.
This provided a key source of liquidity for the payment system and temporarily caused the daily float held by the Federal Reserve to increase over 6,000 percent.7 After September 11, the Federal Reserve also took steps to improve the future efficiency of the nation's check collection system by working with Congress on the passage of the Check 21 Act in 2002.
A safe and efficient payment system also needs to be accessible, because payment services are most valuable when you can pay anyone regardless of where balances are held.
The ultimate success of any effort to modernize the U.S.
payment system depends on adoption across the entire banking industry.
Therefore, in considering the Federal Reserve's provision of payment services, Congress took steps to try to ensure access to services across the country.
As a result, Congress specifically tasked the Federal Reserve with taking into account an adequate level of services nationwide when providing and setting fees for payment services.8 The United States has a highly complex banking system with more than 10,000 depository institutions spread over wide areas with differing payment needs.9 Over 4,800 of those are community banks.10 In many areas, particularly rural areas, community banks may be the primary providers of banking services for individuals and small businesses.
Community banks are, therefore, essential in ensuring access to safe and efficient payment services in towns, cities, and rural communities nationwide so that payments can move across the country regardless of geography—from here in the South, to the Midwest, and coast to coast.
A diverse banking system where institutions of all sizes are able to innovate and meet evolving customer needs is essential to ensure access to safe, efficient, and modern payment services for communities across the nation.
At the Federal Reserve, we support the responsible use of technology and innovation to transform the financial system and reduce frictions and delays, while preserving consumer protections, data privacy and security, and financial stability.
But as technology continues to advance, the intricacies of our digital world become more complex, and I believe we can help ensure that banks are well positioned to take advantage of these technology advancements and innovations.
Like the rest of the financial industry, community banks are investing in new technologies and innovations to meet the growing expectations of their customers.
With their considerable understanding of local needs, community banks are able to put these kinds of innovations to use in meeting the specific needs of their communities.
At the Federal Reserve, we are actively engaging with the banking industry to encourage responsible innovation in the community-banking sector.
But I also firmly believe that we cannot just say community banks need to engage in responsible innovation, we need to empower community banks to do just that, and I am committed to working with my colleagues to realize this objective.
I believe it is our responsibility as a payment service provider and supervisor to ensure that our nation's evolving financial system works for community banks.
Because by empowering them to provide modern and innovative services to their customers, we also ensure that Americans across the country can make payments safely and efficiently.
First, as a provider of payment services, the Federal Reserve has a long history of supporting community banks.
We have long-standing relationships with, and the nationwide infrastructure to provide services to, thousands of community banks across the country.
While the existing payment infrastructure provided by the Federal Reserve has generally served community banks and the nation's economy well, advances in technology have also created opportunities to modernize these payment services.
Collectively, these efforts will create a modern payment infrastructure that provides community banks the ability to meet customer expectations in offering innovative services with the same effectiveness and efficiency as other providers.
To start, the Board has supported changes to existing Federal Reserve services.
For example, at the end of last year, the Board announced changes to support adoption of an additional same-day ACH window available later in the day.
When it was adopted in 2015, same-day ACH allowed for faster processing and return of recurring, low-cost payments such as payroll and bill payments.
More specifically, it will allow banks and their customers, particularly those located outside the eastern time zone, to use same-day ACH services during a greater portion of the business day.
The FedNowSM Service, announced last August, will create a new payment infrastructure for institutions of all sizes to offer innovative faster payment services.
Community banks in particular were strong supporters of developing the FedNow Service.
Many of them emphasized that the Federal Reserve's long-standing policy commitment to promoting nationwide access would result in a service that is accessible to banks of all sizes.
They felt that this in turn would ultimately increase the long-term likelihood of being able to offer faster payment services in their communities.
Community banks continued to voice strong support in response to our most recent request for comment on the design of the FedNow Service.
At the same time, they raised a number of important issues, including interoperability, time to market, and use of volume-based pricing.
These issues are important to community banks, and as such, they are important to me.
I intend to work with my colleagues so that the FedNow Service meets the needs of community banks and their customers.
I hope that you will continue to engage with us, continue to provide your feedback, and continue to be patient as we undertake this effort to develop the FedNow Service.
Because with your input, I believe the Federal Reserve can continue its long history—which started with bank notes and checks, then continued with ACH—of providing infrastructure that supports the independence and success of community banks for the long term.
It is also important to understand that technology advancements affect more than just the payment infrastructure behind-the-scenes.
Innovations in consumer and other end-user experiences, such as those facilitated by fintech firms, can also transform the way that consumers interact with their financial institutions, offering community banks additional opportunities to serve their customers in the future.
For instance, I have previously discussed how working with fintech firms may offer community banks potential partnerships that leverage the latest technology to provide customer-first, community-focused financial services and provide customers with efficiencies, such as easy-to-use online applications or rapid loan decisionmaking.
These kinds of strategic partnerships harness the indispensable knowledge and trust that community banks have built with retail customers and local small businesses.
For example, we have seen community banks experience significant growth after partnering with fintech companies to offer checking accounts for online investors, personal loans, and debit cards.
We expect that the efforts to modernize our payment infrastructure that I outlined earlier, such as FedNow, will serve as a foundation for this kind of innovation to flourish, and will support new opportunities for community banks and the communities they serve.
Of course, new technology is also subject to many of the traditional risks banks have managed in the past with more-traditional consumer services, and implementation of new technology should be driven by banks' business strategies and customer needs.
Ultimately, banks remain responsible for conducting due diligence and understanding the risks faced by their organization.
That is why I believe that the Federal Reserve also needs to take steps as a supervisor to ensure our nation's evolving financial system works for community banks.
First and foremost, it is essential we continue to meaningfully engage with stakeholders on these issues.
For example, we recently launched an innovation web page (www.federalreserve.gov/innovate) that will serve as an accessible central hub for stakeholders interested in learning about and engaging with the Federal Reserve on innovation-related matters.11 The web page can serve as a starting point for members of the industry to engage with Federal Reserve specialists, submit questions, and request in-person meetings.
These are also an important opportunity for us to learn, and I encourage you to provide your feedback.
For community banks and their potential fintech partners, I hope that these sessions will serve as a resource to meet one-on-one with Federal Reserve staff members with relevant expertise, discuss fintech developments, share specific projects, and ask questions.
They also provide us an opportunity to hear directly from banks and fintech companies about challenges to innovation.
Another important area of focus for me is community banks' relationships with their vendors and third-party service providers.
As a former community banker, I am acutely aware that community banks are often reliant on outside service providers and vendors to access new technologies and provide payment services.
I also know that supervisory expectations in these areas can be challenging, and I have experienced it myself.
There are several things I believe we can do to help provide clarity and transparency, reduce confusion, and simplify and remove some of the burden community banks face in this area.
First, in order to give community banks a better picture of what success in due diligence of third-party providers looks like, and where it begins and ends, I believe that we should release more information on its necessary elements.
This change would provide clarity and assist community banks in completing their work.
I also believe our guidance should explain what due diligence looks like for a potential fintech partner, because the standards applied to other third parties may not be universally applicable.
Every bank has different objectives, and guidance should reflect some supervisory flexibility so that we do not impede prudent, strategic partnerships between community banks and potential partners.
Regulators should especially support partnerships that combine the strengths of community banks and fintech companies, which have a track record of success.
I also believe the Federal Reserve should allow banks to conduct shared due diligence on potential partners.
If several banks use the same third-party service provider and are open to collaborating, they should be allowed to pool resources instead of duplicating one another's work.
These approaches would not only have the benefit of increasing clarity and transparency for community banks, but could also be beneficial for fintech companies that hope to become third-party providers.
No one benefits when banks and their potential partners or other vendors have to navigate unnecessary differences in guidance between agencies.
To that end, the Federal Reserve is in the process of working with the other banking agencies to update our third-party guidance.
As part of this process, I believe that the banking agencies should all have consistent expectations for third-party relationships, and that the Federal Reserve should, as a starting point, move toward adopting the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency's guidance.
While we make the outcomes available to banks that are clients of a supervised service provider, I believe we can go a step further to increase transparency by also making information that may be useful about our supervision of key service providers available to banks.
Of course, moving forward in these areas requires careful consideration and interagency collaboration, and I have asked our staff to work with other agencies to develop and propose workable options for giving banks the benefit of the knowledge that supervisors have about their potential providers in an appropriate manner.
Finally, I believe regulators and supervisors have a role to play in ensuring that regulatory burden is tailored to bank size, risk, complexity, and capacity.
Knowing the burden that third-party monitoring in particular can present to employees of the smallest banks, I have also encouraged Federal Reserve staff to consider options for further tailoring our expectations for community banks with assets under $1 billion in this area.
Collectively, I view these as important steps to improve the ability of community banks to manage their third-party relationships effectively.
By doing so, I believe we will be able to better support the ability of community banks to access innovative new technology and offer modern services to customers.
The kinds of advances in technology we are discussing here today present challenges and opportunities for banks of all sizes, including community banks.
Investments in new technology are likely to create implementation costs, and payment system innovations are no exception.
Testing new technology, upgrading software and processing systems, and integrating new systems with existing systems will require banks to incur costs and dedicate resources to implementation.
Community banks in particular may incur additional costs, for example to extend operating hours in order to facilitate payments during nonstandard business hours.
However, technological advances also present opportunities for community banks to continue serving their neighbors, and payment services are a key component of this.
Since I joined the Federal Reserve, I have been on the road a lot, visiting Federal Reserve Districts and talking to bankers, consumers, and community groups.
These individuals may be returning to their hometown or moving out of urban centers, but they still have the same expectations for services like those that may be offered by larger banks with nationwide footprints.
Technological developments, like the payment system modernization efforts we have discussed today, allow banks across the country to meet these customer expectations and provide payment services on a competitive basis.
I believe the Federal Reserve is uniquely positioned as a provider of payment services and as a supervisor of banks to ensure that our nation's evolving financial system works for community banks.
As a provider of payment services, our efforts to modernize the nation's payment system through services like FedNow and same-day ACH will ensure community banks and their customers have access to today's financial technology nationwide.
As a supervisor of banks, we can support responsible innovation by reducing regulatory burden where we can, clarifying expectations, and improving the ability of community banks to manage their relationships effectively.
Collectively, I believe these efforts will help support a community banking sector that is well positioned to thrive and offer modern, innovative services to their customers.
By providing such services, community banks can help ensure all Americans can make payments safely and efficiently regardless of their location and that families across the country have access to financial services that are so important to their success and the success of our communities in today's age of advancement.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Data on loans were compiled from Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income, also known as Call Reports, that banks file with the Federal Financial Institution Examination Council.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Perspectives from Main Street: Bank Branch Access in Rural Communities (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, November 2019).
"Policies: The Federal Reserve in the Payments System," Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (issued 1984; revised 1990).
143; Bill Medley, Highways of Commerce: Central Banking and the U.S.
Payments System (PDF) (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, July 2014), p.
The Monetary Control Act of 1980 requires in part "due regard to competitive factors and the provision of an adequate level of such services nationwide...
Including both FDIC-insured commercial banks and savings institutions and federally insured credit unions.

At the 36th Annual NABE Economic Policy Conference, Washington, D.C.
Thank you for the opportunity to participate again this year in the Annual Economic Policy Conference of the National Association for Business Economics.
But first, I would like to share with you some thoughts about the outlook for the U.S.
In its 11th year of a record expansion, the U.S.
The labor market remains strong, economic activity is increasing at a moderate pace, and the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) baseline outlook is for a continuation of this performance in 2020.2 At present, personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, price inflation is running somewhat below the Committee's 2 percent objective, but we project that, under appropriate monetary policy, inflation will rise gradually to our symmetric 2 percent objective.
Although the unemployment rate is around a 50-year low, wages are rising broadly in line with productivity growth and underlying inflation.
We are not seeing any evidence to date that a strong labor market is putting excessive cost-push pressure on price inflation.
Although the fundamentals supporting household consumption remain solid, over 2019, sluggish growth abroad and global developments weighed on investment, exports, and manufacturing in the United States.
Coming into this year, indications suggested that headwinds to global growth had begun to abate, and uncertainties around trade policy had diminished.
The disruption there could spill over to the rest of the global economy.
And inflation expectations—those measured by surveys, market prices, and econometric models—reside at the low end of a range I consider consistent with our price-stability mandate.
Over the course of 2019, the FOMC undertook a shift in the stance of monetary policy to offset some significant global growth headwinds and global disinflationary pressures.
I believe this shift was well timed and has been providing support to the economy and helping to keep the U.S.
Monetary policy is in a good place and should continue to support sustained growth, a strong labor market, and inflation returning to our symmetric 2 percent objective.
As long as incoming information about the economy remains broadly consistent with this outlook, the current stance of monetary policy likely will remain appropriate.
That said, monetary policy is not on a preset course.
The Committee will proceed on a meeting-by-meeting basis and will be monitoring the effects of our recent policy actions along with other information bearing on the outlook as we assess the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate.
In January 2019, my FOMC colleagues and I affirmed that we aim to operate with an ample level of bank reserves in the U.S.
These efforts have been successful in achieving stable money market conditions, including over the year-end.
As our bill purchases continue to build reserves toward levels that we associate with ample conditions, we intend to gradually transition away from the active use of repo operations.
And as reserves reach durably ample levels, we intend to slow the pace of purchases such that our balance sheet grows in line with trend demand for our liabilities.
Let me emphasize that we stand ready to adjust the details of this program as appropriate and in line with our goal, which is to keep the federal funds rate in the target range desired by the FOMC, and that these operations are technical measures not intended to change the stance of monetary policy.
Finally, allow me to offer a few words about the FOMC's review of the monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices that we commenced in 2019.
This review—with public engagement unprecedented in scope for us—is the first of its kind for the Federal Reserve.
We are drawing on these insights as we assess how best to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability.
We will continue reporting on our discussions in the minutes of FOMC meetings and will share our conclusions with the public when we complete the review later this year.5
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
I am grateful to Brian Doyle of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.
The most recent Summary of Economic Projections is an addendum to the minutes of the December 2019 FOMC meeting.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 10–11, 2019," press release, January 3.
See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190130c.htm.
Also see the Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans, available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190320c.htm.
See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation, which can be found on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20191011a.htm.

Financial Markets and Monetary Policy: Is There a Hall of Mirrors Problem?
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York
Thank you to the conference organizers for inviting me here to discuss what former Chair Bernanke has famously referred to as a "hall of mirrors" problem: a situation in which a central bank's reaction function and financial market prices interact in economically suboptimal and potentially destabilizing ways.1 In my remarks today, I will lay out the way I think about the interplay between financial markets and monetary policy, with a focus on how I myself seek to integrate noisy but often correlated signals about the economy that I glean from models, surveys, and financial markets.2
First, because of Friedman's long and variable lags, monetary policy should be—and, at the Fed, is—forward looking.
Policy decisions made today will have no effect on today's inflation or unemployment rates, so good policy needs to assess where the economic fundamentals are going tomorrow to calibrate appropriate policy today.
An asset's value today depends upon its expected future cash flows discounted by a rate that reflects the expected path of the policy rate plus an appropriate risk premium.
Thus, central banks and financial markets are looking at the same data on macro fundamentals to make inferences about the future path of the economy, and, of course, any decisions on the policy path made by the central bank will influence asset prices through the discount factor.
So optimal monetary policy will (almost) always be correlated with asset prices.
Second, because key variables that are crucial inputs for conducting monetary policy—such as r*, u*, and expected inflation, to name just three—are both unobserved and time varying, responsible monetary policy requires informed views about how these variables evolve over time as well as a humility and an appreciation for the uncertainties surrounding baseline views, however well informed they might be.
As I have written before, monetary policy needs to be—and, at the Fed, is— "data dependent" in two distinct ways.4 Policy should be data dependent in the sense that incoming data indicate the position of the economy relative to the ultimate objectives of price stability and maximum employment.
This information on where the economy is relative to the goals of monetary policy is an important input into standard interest rate feedback rules, such as those introduced by John Taylor in 1993 and ones that continue today to inform monetary policy decisions at the Fed and at other central banks.5
Monetary policy, however, also needs to be data dependent in the second sense—that incoming data contain signals—that can enable the central bank to update its estimates of r* and u* in order to obtain its best estimate of the destination to which the economy is heading.
As I mentioned a moment ago, a challenge for policymakers is that key variables that are essential inputs to monetary policy—such as u*, r*, and expected inflation—cannot be observed directly and must be inferred from observed data.
And as is indicated in the Summary of Economic Projections, Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants have, over the past seven years, repeatedly revised down their estimates of both u* and r* as unemployment fell and as real interest rates remained well below previous estimates of neutral without the rise in inflation those earlier estimates would have predicted.
I would argue that these revisions to u* and r* indicate that the FOMC has been data dependent in this second sense and that these updated assessments of u* and r* have had an important influence on the path for the policy rate actually implemented in recent years.
Indeed, had the Fed not been data dependent in this second sense and remained closed to the possibility that the economy had changed and historical estimates of r* and u* needed to be revised, that stubbornness would have represented a material policy mistake.
In addition to u* and r*, an important input into any monetary policy assessment is the state of inflation expectations.
One of the robust messages from the DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) literature on optimal monetary policy is that, away from the effective lower bound, optimal monetary policy will not eliminate all inflation volatility—there are always shocks—but will, under rational expectations (RE), deliver average, and under RE, expected, inflation equal to the target.
Since the late 1990s, inflation expectations appear to have been stable and well anchored in the neighborhood of our 2 percent goal.
However, like r* and u*, inflation expectations are not directly observable and so must be inferred from data.
Let me now discuss in more detail how I use a form of model averaging to combine financial market data with data from surveys and econometric models to inform my thinking about the evolution of two key inputs to monetary policy: r* and long-run expected inflation.
To be sure, financial market signals are noisy, and day-to-day movements in asset prices are unlikely to tell us much about the cyclical or structural position of the economy, let alone r* and expected inflation.
However, persistent shifts in financial market conditions can be informative.
Signals derived from financial market data, when combined with signals revealed from surveys of households and firms along with the filtered estimates from econometric models, can together provide valuable and reasonably robust foundations for real-time inference about the direction of travel in r* and expected inflation.
For example, a "straight read" of interest rate futures prices provides one source of high-frequency information about the destination for the federal funds rate expected by market participants.
The destination for the federal funds rate implied by a straight read of futures prices is in turn the sum of the market-implied r* plus market-implied expected inflation.
But these signals from interest rate futures are only a pure measure of the expected policy rate path under the assumption of a zero risk premium.
For this reason, it is useful to compare policy rate paths derived from market prices with the path obtained from surveys of market participants, which, while subject to measurement error, should not be contaminated with a term premium.
Market- and survey-based estimates of the policy rate path are often highly correlated.
But when there is a divergence between the path or destination for the policy rate implied by the surveys and a straight read of interest rate derivatives prices, I place at least as much weight on the survey evidence—for example, derived from the surveys of primary dealers and market participants conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York—as I do on the estimates obtained from market prices.
Finally, as another reality check, I, of course, always consult the latest estimate of r* produced by the Laubach and Williams (2003) unobservable components state-space model, which, I should point out, includes no information on asset prices other than the short-term nominal interest rate itself.6
Quotes from the Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) market can provide valuable information about both r* and expected inflation.
TIPS market data, together with nominal Treasury yields, can be used to construct measures of "breakeven inflation" or inflation compensation that provide a noisy signal of market expectations of future inflation.
But, again, a straight read of breakeven inflation based on TIPS curve forward real rates needs to be augmented with a model to filter out the liquidity and risk premium components that place a wedge between inflation compensation and expected inflation.
It is again useful to compare estimates of expected inflation derived from breakeven inflation data with estimates of expected inflation obtained from surveys—for example, the expected inflation over the next 5 to 10 years from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers.
Market- and survey-based estimates of expected inflation are correlated, but, again, when there is a divergence between the two, I place at least as much weight on the survey evidence as on the market-derived estimates.
Again, here I also consult time-series models of underlying inflation, such as Stock and Watson (2007) and Cecchetti and others (2017), presented at the U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum in 2017.7 At the Fed, the staff have estimated a state-space model decomposition of the common factor that drives a number of different measures of inflation expectations.
As I look at all of this evidence from market signals, surveys, and econometric models, I judge that inflation expectations reside at the low end of the range I consider consistent with our price-stability goal of 2 percent personal consumption expenditure inflation in the long run.
In both of the examples I have just discussed, the medium-frequency evolution of market-based, survey-based, and model-based estimates of r* and expected inflation have, over time, tended to move broadly together.
When high-frequency market signals diverge from the survey- and model-based estimates, the potential benefit from increasing the weight on a signal derived from a forward-looking asset price versus backward estimates from models and slowly evolving surveys must be balanced against the cost of treating the noise in the asset price as a signal.
In conclusion, while my colleagues and I are attuned to the potential for a hall of mirrors problem, in my experience this affliction is one the Federal Reserve guards against and does not suffer from.
My colleagues and I do look at developments in asset markets, but never in isolation and always in the context of balancing asset market signals with complementary signals from surveys and econometric models.
It is fair to say that when signals from all three sources line up in the same direction—as, for example, has been the case with market-, survey-, and model-based estimates of r*—the effect of those combined signals, at least on my thinking about the policy path, is more material than when the signals provide conflicting interpretations.
Bernanke (2004), "What Policymakers Can Learn from Asset Prices," speech delivered at the Investment Analysts Society of Chicago, Chicago, April 15.
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants.
Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Clearing House and the Bank Policy Institute Annual Conference, New York, November 27.
Taylor (1993), "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.
See Thomas Laubach and John Williams (2003), "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.
Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
Schoenholtz (2017), Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF), report prepared for the 2017 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3.

Monetary Policy Strategies and Tools When Inflation and Interest Rates Are Low
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York
Comments on Monetary Policy in the Next Recession?, a report by Stephen Cecchetti, Michael Feroli, Anil Kashyap, Catherine Mann, and Kim Schoenholtz
I want to thank Anil Kashyap and the Initiative on Global Markets for inviting me, along with my colleague Raphael Bostic, to comment on this year's U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum report by a distinguished set of authors.1 This year's report addresses the challenges that monetary policy is likely to encounter in the next downturn.
This topic is under active review by the Federal Reserve and our peers in many other economies.2
The report explores the important question of whether the new monetary policy tools are likely to be sufficiently powerful in the next downturn.
The report assesses how unconventional tools—including forward guidance, balance sheet policies, negative nominal interest rates, yield curve control, and exchange rate policies—have performed over the past few decades.
It employs a novel approach by examining the effect on an index of financial conditions the authors construct.
This approach adds to what we have learned from earlier papers that have examined the performance of unconventional policy tools with respect to individual components of financial conditions—most notably, long-term sovereign yields, but also mortgage rates, equities, exchange rates, and corporate debt spreads.3
The authors conclude that unconventional monetary policies worked during the crisis but did not fully offset a significant tightening in financial conditions.
Looking back at the international experience, the evidence suggests that forward guidance and balance sheet policies were broadly effective in providing accommodation following the financial crisis.
But they were less effective when there were long delays in implementation or apparent inconsistencies among policy tools.
It is important to distill key lessons from the past use of these tools in order to make them more effective in the future.4
The delays often reflected concerns about the putative costs and risks of these policies, such as stoking high inflation and impairing market functioning.
Second, forward guidance proved to be vital during the crisis, but it took some time to recognize the importance of conditioning forward guidance on specific outcomes or dates and to align the full set of policy tools.
In several cases, the targeted outcomes set too low a bar, which in turn diminished market expectations regarding monetary accommodation.
In some cases, expectations regarding the timing of liftoff and asset purchase tapering worked at cross-purposes.
In addition, in some cases, it proved difficult to calibrate asset purchase programs smoothly over the course of the recovery.
To the extent that the public is uncertain about the conditions that might trigger asset purchases, the scale of purchases, and how long the purchases might be sustained, it could undercut the efficacy of the policy.
Furthermore, the cessation of asset purchases and subsequent balance sheet normalization can present challenges in communications and implementation.
In part as a result, it took some time to integrate forward guidance and other unconventional policies seamlessly, and it took even longer to recognize that policy settings were unlikely to return to pre-crisis norms.
The current generation of central bankers faces a different core challenge than the last generation, with substantially smaller scope for cutting interest rates to buffer the economy and inflation that is low and relatively unresponsive to resource utilization.
With trend inflation running below the symmetric 2 percent objective, there is a risk that inflation expectations have slipped.
With price inflation showing little sensitivity to resource utilization, policy may have to remain accommodative for a long time to achieve 2 percent inflation following a period of undershooting.
With the equilibrium interest rate very low, the Federal Open Market Committee can cut the federal funds rate by only about half as much as it has done historically to buffer the economy from recession.
Consequently, the policy rate is likely to be constrained by the lower bound more frequently, likely at times when inflation is below target and unemployment is elevated.
The likelihood that the policy rate will be stuck at the lower bound more frequently risks eroding expected inflation and actual inflation, which could further compress the room to cut nominal interest rates in a downward spiral.
Today's new normal calls not only for a broader set of tools, but also a different strategy.6 We should clarify in advance that we will deploy a broader set of tools proactively to provide accommodation when shocks are likely to push the policy rate to its lower bound.
Equally important, we should adopt a strategy that successfully achieves maximum employment and average inflation outcomes of 2 percent over time.
The lessons from the crisis would argue for an approach that commits to maintain policy at the lower bound until full employment and target inflation are achieved.
This forward guidance could be reinforced by interest rate caps on short-term Treasury securities over the same horizon.
To have the greatest effect, it will be important to communicate and explain the framework in advance so that the public anticipates the approach and takes it into account in their spending and investment decisions.
Forward guidance that commits to refrain from lifting the policy rate from its lower bound until full employment and 2 percent inflation are achieved is vital to ensure achievement of our dual-mandate goals with compressed conventional policy space.7 To strengthen the credibility of the forward guidance, interest rate caps could be implemented in tandem as a commitment mechanism.
Based on its assessment of how long it is likely to take to achieve full employment and target inflation, the Committee would commit to capping rates out the yield curve for a period consistent with its expectation for the duration of the outcome-based forward guidance.
Of course, if the outlook shifted materially, the Committee could reassess how long it will take to reach its goals and adjust policy accordingly.
One important benefit is that this approach would smoothly move to capping interest rates on the short-to-medium segment of the yield curve once the policy rate moves to the lower bound and avoid the risk of delays or uncertainty that could be associated with asset purchases regarding the scale and timeframe.
The interest rate caps would transmit additional accommodation through the longer rates that are relevant for households and businesses in a manner that is more akin to conventional policy and more continuous than quantitative asset purchases.
Another important benefit is that the forward guidance and the yield curve caps would reinforce each other.
Setting the horizon on the interest rate caps to reinforce forward guidance on the policy rate would augment the credibility of the yield curve caps and thereby diminish concerns about an open-ended balance sheet commitment.
Once target inflation and full employment are achieved, and the caps expire, any short-to-medium-term Treasury securities that were acquired under the program would roll off organically, unwinding the policy smoothly and predictably.
This approach should avoid some of the tantrum dynamics that have led to premature steepening of the yield curve in several jurisdictions.8
Today's low-inflation, low interest rate environment requires not only new recession-fighting tools but also a new strategy to address the persistent undershooting of the inflation target—and the risk to inflation expectations—well before a downturn.
Various strategies have been proposed that seek to make up for past inflation deviations from target.9 To be successful, formal makeup strategies, such as an average-inflation-targeting rule, require that market participants, households, and businesses understand the policy in advance and find it credible.
While formal average-inflation-targeting rules have some attractive properties in theory, they could be difficult to communicate and implement in practice due to time-inconsistency problems as well as uncertainty about underlying economic parameters.10
I prefer flexible inflation averaging that would aim to achieve inflation outcomes that average 2 percent over time.
Flexible inflation averaging would imply supporting inflation a bit above 2 percent for some time to compensate for the inflation shortfall over previous years and anchor inflation expectations at 2 percent.
Flexible inflation averaging would bring some of the benefits of a formal average-inflation-targeting rule, but it could be more robust and simpler to communicate and implement.
Following several years when inflation has remained in the range of 1-1/2 to 2 percent, the Committee could target inflation outcomes in a range of 2 to 2-1/2 percent for a period to achieve inflation outcomes of 2 percent, on average, overall.
By committing to achieve inflation outcomes that average 2 percent over time, the Committee would make clear in advance that it would accommodate rather than offset modest upward pressures to inflation in what could be described as a process of opportunistic reflation.11 This approach will help move inflation expectations back to our 2 percent objective, which is critical to preserve conventional policy space.
It is important to emphasize that for monetary policy to be effective, it will be key for policymakers to communicate their strategy clearly in advance to the public, to act early and decisively, and to commit to providing the requisite accommodation until full employment and target inflation are sustainably achieved.
This was one of the important conclusions of this year's U.S.
Even with a revamped monetary policy strategy and expanded tools, there are risks.
As the authors note, persistent very low levels of long-run rates could hamper the ability of monetary policy to support the economy in a downturn through the traditional mechanism of pushing down long-term rates.12 Moreover, the equilibrium interest rate or, possibly, inflation expectations could be lower than most current estimates, with the implication that unconventional policies would need to compensate for a larger reduction in the conventional policy buffer.13
Accordingly, in addition to a forceful response from monetary policy, robust countercyclical fiscal policy is vital.
The reduced conventional monetary policy buffer makes the importance of fiscal support during a downturn even greater than it has been in the past, and the case for fiscal support is especially compelling in the context of very low long-term interest rates.
Not only is fiscal policy more vital when monetary policy is constrained by the lower bound, but research suggests it is also more powerful.14
Whereas monetary policy is powerful but blunt, fiscal policy can be more targeted in its effects.
This is especially important today, when a large share of American households have low liquid savings and are particularly vulnerable to periods of unemployment or underemployment.
The appropriate design of a more automatic, faster-acting countercyclical fiscal approach requires study and development.
Just as monetary policymakers are actively reviewing their tools and strategies, now is the time to undertake a review of fiscal tools and strategies to ensure they are ready and effective.
Financial stability is central to the achievement of our dual-mandate goals.
The new normal of low interest rates and inflation also has implications for the interplay between financial stability and monetary policy.
In the decades when the Phillips curve was steeper, inflation tended to rise as the economy heated up, which would prompt the Committee to raise interest rates to restrictive levels.
These interest rate increases would have the effect of tightening financial conditions more broadly, thereby naturally damping financial imbalances as the expansion extends.
With trend inflation persistently below target and a flat Phillips curve, not only is the policy rate expected be low for long due to the decline in the neutral rate, but the policy rate may also remain below the neutral rate for longer in order to move inflation back to target sustainably.
The expectation of a long period of accommodative monetary policy and low rates, during a period with sustained high rates of resource utilization, is conducive to risk-taking, providing incentives to reach for yield and take on additional debt.
To the extent that the combination of a low neutral rate, a flat Phillips curve, and low underlying inflation may lead financial imbalances to become more tightly linked to the business cycle, it is important to use tools other than monetary policy to temper the financial cycle.
In today's new normal, a combination of strengthened structural safeguards along with countercyclical macroprudential tools is important to enable monetary policy to stay focused on achieving maximum employment and target inflation.15 The countercyclical capital buffer, which was not available before the crisis, is particularly well designed to address financial imbalances over the cycle.
With the policy rate more likely to be constrained by the lower bound, the core challenge facing the current generation of central bankers is different than the last generation.
To be fully effective, proactive use of an expanded toolkit needs to be coupled with a new strategy that achieves average inflation outcomes of 2 percent along with maximum employment over time.
I am grateful to Ivan Vidangos of the Federal Reserve Board for assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Mann, and Kim Schoenholtz (2020), Monetary Policy in the Next Recession?, report presented at the 2020 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, February 21.
See European Central Bank (2020), "ECB Launches Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy," press release, January 23; Bank of Canada (2017), "Monetary Policy Framework Issues: Toward the 2021 Inflation-Target Renewal," workshop held at the Bank of Canada, Quebec, September 14; and Mark Carney (2020), "A Framework for All Seasons?" speech delivered at "The Future of Inflation Targeting," a research workshop held at the Bank of England, London, January 9.
The Federal Reserve's review of its monetary policy strategies, tools, and communications is ongoing.
Clarida (2019), "The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices," speech delivered at the 2019 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, February 22; and Jerome H.
Powell (2019), "Monetary Policy: Normalization and the Road Ahead," speech delivered at the 2019 SIEPR Economic Summit, Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., March 8.
See Joseph Gagnon, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011), "The Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchases," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
Sears (2013), "Duration Risk versus Local Supply Channel in Treasury Yields: Evidence from the Federal Reserve's Asset Purchase Announcements (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-35 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April); Michael A.S.
Joyce, Ana Lasaosa, Ibrahim Stevens, and Matthew Tong (2011), "The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
113–61; Simon Gilchrist, David López-Salido, and Egon Zakrajšek (2015), "Monetary Policy and Real Borrowing Costs at the Zero Lower Bound," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol.
77–109; Marcel Fratzscher, Marco Lo Duca, and Roland Straub (2016), "ECB Unconventional Monetary Policy: Market Impact and International Spillovers," IMF Economic Review, vol.
Kiley (2013), "Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy Statements, and Uncovered Interest Parity: Before and after the Zero Lower Bound (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-17 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January); Michael T.
Kiley (2014), "The Response of Equity Prices to Movements in Long‐Term Interest Rates Associated with Monetary Policy Statements: Before and after the Zero Lower Bound," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
Kiley (2016), "Monetary Policy Statements, Treasury Yields, and Private Yields: Before and after the Zero Lower Bound," Finance Research Letters, vol.
Wright (2014), "Evaluating Asset-Market Effects of Unconventional Monetary Policy: A Multi-Country Review," Economic Policy, vol.
For instance, analysis by Ben Bernanke suggests "that a combination of asset purchases and forward guidance can add roughly 3 percentage points of policy space." See Ben S.
Bernanke (2020), "The New Tools of Monetary Policy (PDF)," presidential address to the American Economic Association, San Diego, Calif., January 4, p.3.
This issue was discussed in the July 2019 Federal Open Market Committee meeting in the context of the framework review.
3), "Participants further observed that such inflation risks—along with several of the other perceived risks of providing substantial accommodation through nontraditional policy tools, including possible adverse implications for financial stability—had not been realized.
In particular, a number of participants commented that, as many of the potential costs of the Committee's asset purchases had failed to materialize, the Federal Reserve might have been able to make use of balance sheet tools even more aggressively over the past decade in providing appropriate levels of accommodation." (Available on the Board's website (PDF)).
See Lael Brainard (2019), "Federal Reserve Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications: Some Preliminary Views," speech delivered at the presentation of the 2019 William F.
Roberts (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February); and Hess Chung, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019), "Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January).
For unusually severe recessions, such as the financial crisis, such an approach could be augmented with purchases of 10-year Treasury securities to provide further accommodation at the long end of the yield curve.
The requisite scale of such purchases—when combined with medium-term yield curve ceilings and forward guidance on the policy rate—should be relatively smaller than if the longer-term asset purchases were used alone.
Svensson (2020), "Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve," NBER Working Paper Series 26657 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January).
See the discussion of formal makeup strategies in the minutes of the September 2019 Federal Open Market Committee meeting (pp.
See also David Reifschneider and David Wilcox (2019), "Average Inflation Targeting Would Be a Weak Tool for the Fed to Deal with Recession and Chronic Low Inflation (PDF)," Policy Brief PB19-16 (Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, November).
Wright (2019), "The Federal Reserve's Current Framework for Monetary Policy: A Review and Assessment (PDF)," paper presented at the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, June 4.
See, for example, the minutes of the October 2019 Federal Open Market Committee meeting (p.
4): "In addition, some participants noted that the effectiveness of these tools might be diminished in the future, as longer-term interest rates have declined to very low levels and would likely be even lower following an adverse shock that could lead to the resumption of large-scale asset purchases; as a result, there might be limited scope for balance sheet tools to provide accommodation." (Available on the Board's website (PDF)).
Kiley (2019), "The Global Equilibrium Real Interest Rate: Concepts, Estimates, and Challenges," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-076 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October).
Krugman (1998), "It's Baaack: Japan's Slump and the Return of the Liquidity Trap," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no.
Blanchard and Daniel Leigh (2013), "Growth Forecast Errors and Fiscal Multipliers," American Economic Review, vol.
See, for example, the minutes of the January 2020 Federal Open Market Committee meeting (p.

At the Conference for Community Bankers sponsored by The American Bankers Association, Orlando, Florida
Thank you to the American Bankers Association for inviting me to address this year's Conference for Community Bankers.
Let me begin by stating that the views I express today are my own, and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve.
As community bankers, you have worked hard to develop a deep understanding of your local economies, while also keeping perspective on the broader economic picture.
There is little I could tell you about your local communities that you do not already know, but I thought I might say a few words on the national economic outlook before turning to my main topic for today.
My colleagues and I on the Federal Open Market Committee had our most recent meeting about two weeks ago, when we decided to keep our target range for the federal funds rate unchanged at 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent.
This policy setting should help support the economic expansion, which is now in its 11th year.
economy is for continued growth at a moderate pace, with the unemployment rate—which is the lowest it has been in 50 years—remaining low.
I also see inflation gradually rising to the Committee's 2 percent objective.
So on the whole, the national economic backdrop looks very favorable, which should be broadly supportive of your local economies.
Let me now turn to my main topic for today, the interaction between innovation and regulation for community banks.
As the Federal Reserve Board's first designated governor with experience in community banking, I am committed to maintaining a strong and thriving community bank sector.
Small banks are the lifeblood of their communities—and they ensure that consumers and businesses have access to financial services.
To community bankers, customers are much more than their credit score or their annual income, and small businesses are far more than their most recent revenues.
By extending credit and offering specialized products and services that meet the needs of their borrowers, these banks empower communities to thrive.
The first digital banks appeared on the scene about 25 years ago.
As financial institutions succeed in digitizing more of their offerings, customers are able to monitor cash flows, make direct payments, understand changes in their credit scores, track spending, and budget more easily.
Technologies like predictive analytics, when supported with appropriate consumer protections, can improve bank services and performance by enabling continuous tailoring of the customer experience.
It also helps banks identify products that are best suited for their customers and their business model and strategy.
Community banks thrive when they find creative ways to serve their communities, using everything they know to build relationships, offer solutions, and make lending decisions.
We need only look to the performance of community banks during the financial crisis to see how well they leverage this local knowledge and their relationships to make lending decisions.
After the onset of the crisis, community banks' superior loan quality resulted in lower aggregate delinquency and charge-off rates compared to the largest banks.
This superior performance was widespread—community banks in the vast majority of states outperformed the largest banks in this way.1
In the third quarter of 2019, community banks' pre-tax return on average assets was 1.5 percent, marking the highest pre-tax return on assets ratio reported by community banks since 2006.
Asset quality also remains strong for community banks and is better than for larger banks.
The community bank net charge-off rate for total loans and leases was less than 0.2 percent at the end of the third quarter 2019.
Let me state that again—the net charge-off rate was less than 0.2 percent, less than half of the industry average.
Community bank capital levels remain at continued high and increasing levels.
Community banks reported a total risk-based capital ratio of nearly 16 percent, as compared to the industry average of less than 15 percent.
This type of performance positions the community banking sector for continued success this year and well into the future, helping ensure the preservation of the community bank model for future generations of Americans.
While technology continues to evolve and change the way we live and bank for the better, it still cannot by itself fulfill that unique and vital role.
Today, there are more than 4,800 community banks in the United States.2 Nearly 80 percent of these have assets totaling less than $500 million, with roughly 40 full- and part-time employees, on average.
The vast majority of these community banks are financially strong, and are the backbone of the towns and cities they serve, providing loans to individuals and businesses in the local area.
But as customers' needs and goals evolve, community banks will need to evolve to meet them.
The successful integration of financial technology into the community bank business model is proving to be enormously valuable to enable community banks to enhance the services they've already proven they can deliver effectively.
Access to technology and services to meet customer needs is critical to ensuring community banks remain vibrant.
For the remainder of my remarks, I will focus on my vision for creating pathways to responsible community bank innovation.
In particular, I will discuss the promise and the challenges that smaller banks face in identifying, integrating, and deploying transformative new technologies, and I will offer some ideas for how the Federal Reserve can help community banks find and manage their relationships with service providers.
Community banks have always been innovators, but rapid technology adoption is challenging for banks of all sizes.
In most cases, realizing the potential that technology offers requires community banks to obtain services from other companies or products from core service providers, which I will refer to collectively as third-party providers.
As I noted earlier, banks with less than $500 million in assets employ roughly 40 people on average—nowhere near the number required to exhaustively develop, test, and manage every element of novel technologies.
These compliance costs are in some instances disproportionate to bank size, complexity, risk, and capacity and can be the same for a bank with $10 million in assets and a bank with $10 billion in assets.
Further, expectations of due diligence when applied to a potential fintech partner may require more financial history or information than that partner can provide.
Due diligence for new third-party relationships, even those that are not start-ups, can require a community bank to collect and analyze a significant amount of complex information.
Bank employees must review thousands of pages of documentation, and the workload per vendor can be the same for all banks, regardless of their asset size and number of employees.
And as someone who has been involved in this compliance work, I know that it's not as if other responsibilities can wait—community bank employees often wear several hats.
Community banks must weigh the benefit of any third-party relationship against the additional work required to evaluate the third party.
Collaboration between a bank and its core system provider is critical to ensure that technology solutions can be integrated quickly and cost effectively within the core system.
Responsible innovation, especially for smaller institutions, requires two key aspects: a clear idea of how the technology serves a bank's strategic objectives and a regulatory environment that supports innovation.
I will touch today on the important interplay between these factors, and in particular, the role that regulators can play in creating a regulatory environment that is conducive to innovation, preserves the safety and soundness of the financial system, and protects consumers.
As regulators, we need to ensure that banks uphold sound risk-management practices.
Yet we also have information that can help community banks meet those standards.
Banks need to identify their goals and then look to identify the kinds of products and services that can help them move forward to implement that strategy.
In the past, I have spoken about the importance of considering the impact of new technologies and finding ways to leverage them, if a bank feels that it fits into its business model and strategy.
For community banks, a decision to embrace a new technology or innovation is almost always synonymous with third-party engagement.
Regulators and supervisors can contribute to an environment where banks are empowered to achieve these strategic objectives, simplifying and clarifying the process of third-party selection, due diligence, and monitoring.
A bank may decide that its business model should evolve, and that offering a new product or partnering with a fintech company will help it position itself for future growth.
This decision is an essential one, but what comes next? This is a new world for most community banks, and supervisors and regulators can lend their expertise to those banks seeking to navigate the unfamiliar landscape.
To that end, the Federal Reserve recently launched a web page on innovation and announced several upcoming Reserve Bank events.
The innovation page on our website (www.federalreserve.gov/innovate) is intended to be a one-stop shop for supervisory information, publications, research, and international work that is related to technology innovation.
Most importantly, the web page also facilitates interaction with Federal Reserve System specialists, to enable bankers and tech industry participants to submit questions about all aspects of technology in the financial services industry, or to request an in-person meeting.
We have also launched a series of Innovation Office Hours events hosted by Reserve Banks.
These events incorporate panel discussions and face-to-face meetings for bankers with regulators and supervisors, which are intended to be a resource for both state member banks and fintech companies seeking partnerships with or offering services to banks.
During these meetings, banks that attend the office hours will have an opportunity to share specific projects or proposed partnerships and learn about how regulators approach and consider risk management in those contexts.
Equally important, the events provide regulators an opportunity to hear directly from banks and fintech companies about challenges to innovation.
Our first office hours event will be held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta later this month.
These are an important opportunity for us to learn, and I look forward to hearing your feedback on these events.
This step can be challenging given a lack of information about potential partners when many firms, and their product offerings, are new.
Notably, in the 2019 National Survey of Community Banks, community bankers voiced a desire for more transparency into third-party service providers, to inform decisions about whether to enter into contracts with these providers and the type of contract that may be appropriate.3
In this regard, I believe the Federal Reserve should consider several possible steps.
This could provide a starting point for community banks by sharing information about the types of companies providing services to a large number of financial institutions.
These exams are focused on risk management, audit, and internal controls.
The Fed and other agencies have the statutory authority to oversee third-party providers that serve the banks they supervise.
Providers that represent a significant level of risk to their clients are part of an interagency supervisory program.
The agencies make the outcomes of those exams available to banks that are clients of a supervised service provider.
I believe we can take a step further with increasing transparency on our supervisory program by making information that may be useful about our supervision of key service providers available to banks.
Of course, moving forward in these areas requires careful consideration and interagency collaboration, and I have asked our staff to work with other agencies to develop and propose workable options for giving banks the benefit of the knowledge that supervisors have about their potential providers in an appropriate manner.
Once banks seeking to innovate have navigated the selection process and identified a partner, they now face a complicated due-diligence process.
I believe that regulators and supervisors have a role in easing the burden of that process for community banks in several respects.
First, we could help by implementing clear third-party guidance that is consistent across all regulatory agencies.
The Federal Reserve is in the process of working with the other banking agencies to update our third-party guidance.
I believe that the banking agencies should all have consistent expectations for third-party relationships, and that the Federal Reserve should, as a starting point, move toward adopting the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency's (OCC) guidance.
It is incredibly inefficient to have banks and their potential fintech partners and other vendors try to navigate unnecessary differences and inconsistencies in guidance across agencies.
Second, this guidance should allow banks to conduct shared due diligence on potential partners.
If several banks use the same third-party service provider and are open to collaborating, they should be allowed to pool resources instead of duplicating one another's work.
Third, the guidance should explain what due diligence looks like for a potential fintech partner, because the standards applied to other third parties may not be universally applicable.
For example, many fintech companies lack the kind of long financial history associated with more traditional bank vendors.
On its own, the fact that a bank cannot evaluate more than five years of the company's financials should not necessarily stop this company from being considered as a partner.
Every bank has different objectives, and potential partnerships are not one-size-fits-all.
Regulators should especially support partnerships that combine the strengths of community banks and fintech companies, which have a track record of success.
The guidance should reflect some supervisory flexibility, and not impede prudent, strategic partnerships between community banks and potential partners.
Fourth, in order to give community banks a better picture of what success in due diligence looks like, and where it begins and ends, I also believe that we should release more information on its necessary elements.
This change would provide clarity and assist community banks in completing their work.
Such a handbook would not only have the benefit of increasing transparency for community banks but could also be beneficial for fintech companies that hope to become third-party providers.
As I noted earlier, monitoring can take weeks of work every year for community bank employees.
To be sure, this work is an important part of risk management.
But I believe regulators and supervisors have a role to play in ensuring that the burden is tailored to bank size, risk, complexity, and capacity.
Knowing the burden that third-party monitoring can present to employees of the smallest banks, I have encouraged Federal Reserve staff to consider options for further tailoring our expectations for community banks with assets under $1 billion in this area.
We should be mindful that when we apply the same expectations to banks with starkly different asset sizes, we are creating the same workload for a bank with about 30 employees as for a bank with roughly 180 employees, even though their resources and risk profiles are quite different.
To conclude, I believe that we can create a regulatory environment in which community banks are empowered to innovate, in which supervisors leverage their own knowledge to help banks understand what to look for in a service provider.
It's a regulatory environment in which guidance is clear and supervisors are appropriately flexible, and due diligence and third-party evaluations are appropriately scaled.
Every bank must decide for itself whether and how to adapt their business models to new technologies, but supervisors and regulators can facilitate innovation at a few key milestones on that path forward.
First, supervisors and regulators can serve as a resource for banks navigating the financial technology landscape for the first time, and make subject-matter experts accessible.
Second, we can make the process of selecting a partner appropriate for a bank's business strategy a more informed one, by being more transparent about our own supervisory program for certain service providers.
Third, we can facilitate vetting of potential partners by allowing shared due diligence, providing in our guidance specific expectations for partnerships with fintech companies, and publishing a handbook of sound practices in due diligence.
Finally, we can reduce burden on banks as they continue to evaluate risk at third-party providers, by rightsizing our expectations and sharing more information about our supervisory program.
Capacity, in addition to complexity and size, should be considered as we continue to tailor supervisory expectations.
As we work toward the environment I described, communication between regulators, supervisors, banks, and fintech partners must be frequent, and confusion about compliance requirements must not be an impediment to banks who wish to partner with third parties.
I believe the steps I have laid out today are a promising beginning to making this regulatory environment a reality.
Gunther and Kelly Klemme, Financial Stability: Traditional Banks Pave the Way (PDF) (Dallas: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, 2012).
See Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, FDIC Quarterly Banking Profile (PDF) 13, no.

The Economic Outlook, Monetary Policy, and the Demand for Reserves
My plan is to address some topical and important issues, some of which are quite technical but technicalities that I think can have significant consequences.1 After providing my thoughts on where the economy and monetary policy are now, I will turn to what we can expect from monetary policy in the years to come.
Changes in the economic environment since the financial crisis, including an apparent decline in the equilibrium interest rate, have complicated the conduct of monetary policy as we work to achieve our dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices.
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is currently undertaking a review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices to make sure we are best positioned to confront the challenges ahead.
Instead, I would like to address a separate but not unrelated topic, the interaction of bank supervision and regulation with monetary policy, and how supervision and regulation might work to make monetary policy implementation more effective in the current environment, particularly as it relates to a bank's demand for reserves.2
But first, let me start with a brief take on the current economic outlook.
There is much to be encouraged by in the nation's current economic performance even as some notable risks require careful monitoring.
The labor market continues to perform remarkably well, providing a key pillar of support for the rest of the economy.
The labor force participation rate has been steady for some time now despite continued predictions for its decline premised on an aging population moving into retirement.
Taken together, low unemployment and steady participation have boosted the employment-to-population ratio, which has finally surpassed its pre-crisis level.
A strong labor market, in turn, supports a healthy pace of consumption growth and the economy more generally.
There has been some public discussion about what constitutes a tight labor market.
I am in the camp that believes that some additional slack remains in the market, particularly in the potential for higher labor force participation.
I have spoken for some time about my confidence that a strong labor market will continue to draw in workers—and lead other workers to delay retirement or otherwise remain in the labor force—and, so far, I remain optimistic.
Increasing the capital stock and investing in new technologies are important for productivity growth, rising living standards, and the economy's long-run growth rate, so reversing the recent downward trend is essential for the overall health of the economy.
In part, the fall in investment likely reflects business concerns over the pace of global growth and risks to the outlook.
In particular, 2019 was a bad year for economic growth among U.S.
Recently, I have been encouraged by the progress in U.S.
I am hopeful that the recently signed phase-one deal with China will boost U.S.
In addition to the human toll, the virus also threatens significant economic disruption, particularly for China and its neighbors, as workers and consumers stay home and normal activities are otherwise disrupted.
It is too early to say what the full economic effect of the outbreak will be, and this situation will require careful monitoring.
This deviation does not worry me that much, in part because I expect inflation to move back to target over the medium term, in part as some unusually low readings in early 2019 pass out of the data.
I view the current stance of monetary policy as appropriate given the economic outlook and relatively muted inflation pressures.
Policy is in a good place to support continued economic growth, strong labor market conditions, and inflation returning to target.
That said, now is a good time to be thinking about the challenges that monetary policy is likely to face in the coming years.
One important development, as I mentioned at the start, is that interest rates at home and abroad have declined significantly from their pre-recession levels.
Policymakers, economists, and market participants see much of this decline as reflecting a permanent fall in the equilibrium rate of interest—that is, the level of the federal funds rate that keeps the economy at full employment with stable inflation in the longer run.
For example, in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections compiling the individual forecasts of FOMC participants, the median estimate of the longer-run federal funds rate, a value that incorporates policymakers' assessments of the equilibrium rate, was 2-1/2 percent, down from 4-1/4 percent in early 2012.3
All else being equal, a fall in the equilibrium rate of interest lessens the scope for the FOMC to cut rates in response to a significant economic downturn, as the distance to zero shrinks.
In the absence of compensating policy actions, this situation may aggravate economic downturns.
One such tool is forward guidance: By credibly conveying to the public that policymakers will likely pursue a path for the policy rate that is lower than previously anticipated, policymakers can put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates.
In addition, policymakers can implement policies such as large-scale asset purchases (LSAPs) that affect the size and composition of the balance sheet: By purchasing longer-term securities in the open market, the Federal Reserve reduces the quantity of such assets available for purchase.
The increased scarcity tends to raise the price of these securities and depress their yields.
Balance sheet policies can put further downward pressure on longer-term yields by reinforcing the credibility of the forward guidance if these policies are seen as a signal that policymakers intend to keep the policy rate low for an extended period.4
The FOMC used both forward guidance and balance sheet policies in response to the financial crisis.
Some observers argue that forward guidance and asset purchases fully offset the shortfall in policy accommodation caused by a lack of space to cut interest rates further, so that the limits on the Fed's policy rate did not ultimately constrain our policy response to the financial crisis.
Other observers see these policy tools as having had, at best, a small positive effect on the economy.
Somewhere between these two extremes, the majority view is that forward guidance and balance sheet polices likely made up for some, though not all, of the shortfall.5
The experience gained with these tools during and after the financial crisis will likely facilitate their prompt and effective deployment in future episodes when there is no longer space for further cuts in the policy rate.
In retrospect, many of the potential negative effects associated with forward guidance and LSAPs did not materialize.
In particular, inflation remained contained, and longer-run inflation expectations did not become unanchored.
A large balance sheet did not prevent the FOMC from raising the policy rate when it deemed such action was appropriate.
To gain the full benefit of our toolkit, it will be important to continue to communicate clearly about our willingness to use all of our tools in future downturns.6 The greater the public confidence that policymakers will use these tools in response to episodes when the ability to cut the policy rate is constrained, the more real longer-term interest rates will systematically decline in response to negative economic developments, providing an automatic stabilizer to the economy.
Moreover, public confidence in the FOMC's ability to react to economic downturns—even when the policy rate is very low—will support the resilience of longer-term inflation expectations at levels consistent with the FOMC's objective.
Keeping inflation expectations anchored will in turn further support the FOMC's ability to lower real interest rates if the economy were to weaken substantially.
Taking stock, I note that one approach to the constraints on policy imposed by the current low level of interest rates is to make what were previously unconventional tools—balance sheet policies and forward guidance—as conventional as possible.
Although I fully support the FOMC's current plan to purchase Treasury bills and increase the size of the balance sheet in the very short term, over the longer-term, I believe that the viability of balance sheet policies is enhanced if we can show that we can meaningfully shrink the size of the balance sheet relative to gross domestic product following a recession-induced balance sheet expansion.
In effect, I believe that balance sheet policies are more credible if we can show that there is not a persistent ratcheting-up effect in the size of the Fed's asset holdings.
Of course, the balance sheet is not going back to pre-crisis levels, when the size was primarily determined by the Fed's currency liabilities.
As the FOMC announced in January of 2019, the Committee intends to implement monetary policy in an ample-reserves regime.7 With that approach, control over the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily through the setting of the Federal Reserve's administered rates and is not, over the longer term, reliant on frequent and large open market operations.
The Committee also reiterated that it would assess the level of reserves most consistent with efficient and effective monetary policy implementation.
Questions about this level have moved to the forefront following market dislocations and money market pressure amid a temporary, but pronounced, reduction in the supply of reserves as a result of an increase in our nonreserve liabilities in September.
Indeed, this episode has been cited by a number of firms and analysts who estimate that the amount of reserves consistent with an ample framework was higher than they previously had thought.
Following the mid-September volatility, the Committee stated that it would seek to maintain, over time, a level of bank reserves at or above the level that prevailed in early September, a level that we believe is sufficient to operate an ample-reserves regime.
Looking ahead, I judge that it is reasonable that we ask ourselves whether it may be possible to operate with a lower level of reserves and remain consistent with the ample framework.
I will spend the remainder of my time exploring possible means to enhance the efficiency of our monetary policy implementation, including reserve provision, through adjustments to our existing regulatory and supervisory regime.
In particular, I will focus on liquidity regulation and supervision as well as interactions with monetary policy tools.
And I will suggest a policy-based approach to some of the issues I identify.
Before going into more detail about what I mean, let me emphasize that I will be touching on some issues that the Federal Reserve is in the process of observing and evaluating and, in some cases, may be far from reaching any final decisions.
As such, my thoughts on these issues are my own and are likely to evolve, benefiting from further analysis and monitoring of bank behavior and financial markets over time.
Let me take a step back to highlight some of the key features of the current liquidity regulation and supervision regime, features that have resulted in significant increases in the liquidity resilience and risk-management capabilities of our largest institutions.
Taken together, these features—including the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), Regulation YY's enhanced prudential standards, and resolution planning—require large firms to demonstrate that they hold sufficient liquid assets to meet outflows in stressed scenarios and in resolution.
In short, we expect firms to manage their liquidity risk prudently—to self-insure—so they can withstand the types of runs we saw during the crisis without relying on taxpayer support.
This outcome has contributed to a more resilient financial system and leaves taxpayers in a much better place today.
Following the implementation of these requirements, large banks have more than doubled their buffers of liquid assets.
More specifically, our largest banks have significantly increased their holdings of assets known as Level 1 high-quality liquid assets (HQLA).
Level 1 HQLA includes central bank reserves, Treasury securities, and Ginnie Mae securities.
As discussed in the original design for the LCR, all forms of Level 1 HQLA are treated as substitutes.
There is no preference for reserves versus, say, Treasury securities in the calculation of the ratio.
Despite the regulatory text's equal treatment of Level 1 HQLA, we know that reserves have special characteristics when it comes to stress.
Even though the Treasury market is the most liquid in the world, in an actual stress event, banks would still need to take steps to monetize Treasury securities to meet cash outflows.
However, it may be difficult to liquidate a large stock of Treasury securities to meet large "day one" outflows.
For firms with significant capital market activities, wholesale operations, and institutional clients (such as hedge funds), this scenario is not just theoretical.
In the global financial crisis, several firms experienced outflows exceeding tens of billions of dollars in a single day.
Under Regulation YY's enhanced prudential standards, large firms are required to conduct internal liquidity stress tests (ILSTs).
Supervisors expect firms to estimate day-one outflows and to ensure that their liquidity buffers can cover those outflows without reliance on the Federal Reserve.
For firms with large day-one outflows, reserves can meet this need most clearly.
Yet it is worth remembering that a principal reason for the Federal Reserve's creation was to facilitate the movement of reserves when needed from banks with an excess reserve position to those in need of reserves.8 Indeed, it is the reason we are called the Federal Reserve.
Excessive friction in the movement of cash in the financial system was likely a contributor to the market dislocations of last September.
In that regard, I think it is worth considering whether financial system efficiency may be improved if reserves and Treasury securities' liquidity characteristics were regarded as more similar than they are today—that is to say, that reserves and Treasury securities were more easily substitutable in the context of liquidity buffers.
To be clear, the ideas I will discuss do not involve any decrease in banks' liquidity buffers.
Rather, I want to explore options that would maintain at least the level of resilience today while also facilitating the use of HQLA beyond reserves to meet the immediate liquidity needs projected in banks' stress scenarios.
My suggested options are grounded in the principle that the Federal Reserve has an important role in providing liquidity to depository institutions.
Today this role is played by the discount window, through which Reserve Banks provide fully collateralized loans to healthy institutions.
While the range of eligible collateral for such liquidity provision is very broad, it may be worthwhile to focus for the moment on the Federal Reserve's potential to provide liquidity that is collateralized only by Level 1 HQLA.
With firms posting Level 1 assets as collateral, the Fed would be well positioned to provide liquidity to bridge the monetization characteristics of HQLA securities versus reserves.
Acknowledging this potential role in stress scenarios, the Fed may promote efficient market functioning while assuming very limited risk.
If firms could assume that this traditional form of liquidity provision from the Fed was available in their stress-planning scenarios, the liquidity characteristics of Treasury securities could be the same as reserves, and both assets would be available to meet same-day needs.
One approach would be to adopt a policy whereby firms are permitted to assume that the discount window can be used in their liquidity-planning stress scenarios under certain conditions.
The discount window is meant to be used by healthy banks when it is needed.
While there has long been discussion about how the discount window is "broken" because of stigma about using it, we know it is still an important part of firms' contingency planning and preparations.
Banks currently pledge over $1.6 trillion in collateral to the discount window, which means that banks have gone to the trouble of working with their local Reserve Bank to make sure they have access to the window, if needed, and they have set aside a portion of their balance sheets as collateral to do so.9
We have also already publicly clarified in the 2019 resolution planning guidance that firms can assume discount window access in their Title 1 plans if they can meet the terms for borrowing, such as recapitalizing the bank subsidiary.10
We could build on this approach by also allowing firms to rely on the discount window in their ILSTs as a means of monetizing, for example, Treasury securities in their scenarios.
This approach would acknowledge a role for the discount window in stress planning, improve the substitutability of reserves and Treasury securities in firms' HQLA buffers, and maintain the overall level of HQLA that firms need to hold.
Such an approach could improve the efficiency of monetary policy implementation, as firms might show a greater willingness to reallocate to Treasury securities, reducing reserve demand and improving market functioning.
An additional advantage of such an approach is that it could further improve the incentives of firms to be prepared to use the discount window, which we already know is important for contingency planning.
If firms were to include the discount window in their plans for how they will weather a stress scenario, they would also need to demonstrate to supervisors that they are prepared to use it to ensure that their plans are credible.
In connection with this, we are closely examining how international counterparts treat the equivalent of discount window access in their banks' stress-planning scenarios.
Another approach could be to set up a new program or facility: For example, there has been much discussion among market participants, as well as policymakers, about the potential benefits of setting up a standing repurchase agreement, or repo, facility for banks and how such a facility could improve the substitutability of reserves and Treasury securities for these firms.11 While this option is still of interest, there may be benefits to working first with the tools we already have at our immediate disposal.
Finally, some firms and industry observers have pointed to the surcharge for global systemically important banks, and its partial dependence on year-end inputs, as potentially exacerbating the issues I have discussed today.
In summary, there are great benefits to safety and soundness and to financial stability for firms holding sufficient buffers of HQLA to meet potential outflows in stress.
I am not proposing any changes to this basic framework.
What I am proposing is that we can potentially improve the efficiency of monetary policy implementation by improving the substitutability of reserves and Treasury securities through adjusting our expectations for firms in stress-planning scenarios.
There are a variety of approaches we could take, but I think the Fed has a role to play.
"The New Tools of Monetary Policy," (PDF) presidential address to the American Economic Association, San Diego, Calif., January 4.
"Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, June 18–19, 2019," press release, July 10.
"Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 10–11, 2019," press release, January 3.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2019).
"Final Guidance for the 2019 Resolution Plan Submissions by the Eight Largest, Complex U.S.
"Why Are Interest Rates So Low? Causes and Implications," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, October 17.
"Liquidity Regulation and the Size of the Fed's Balance Sheet," speech delivered at the Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., May 4.
"Evaluating Central Banks' Tool Kit: Past, Present, and Future," (PDF) research prepared for the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices (A Fed Listens Event), held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 4–5.
"The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123.
The Federal Reserve System, Its Origin and Growth: Reflections and Recollections, vol.
"Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound," (PDF) paper presented at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30–September 1
All of my remarks today represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Open Market Committee, or the Financial Stability Board.
The extent and origins of the global decline in neutral interest rates are much debated.
Among the likely contributing factors are population aging, a slowdown in the rate of productivity growth, and changing attitude toward risk.
See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190130c.htm.
See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization in note 6.
Warburg recalled to our mind what had been forgotten by most of us, that the real pith of modern banking is the question of the reserve, and that the essential weakness of the American system was the extreme decentralization of resources, resulting in the time of stress or trouble in every individual bank attempting to secure its own solvency in disregard either of the welfare of other banks or of the needs of the business community." See also "A United Reserve Bank of the United States" in Warburg (1930).
See the note to table 5 in Board of Governors (2019b, p.
For additional discussion on the possible role of a standing repo facility (SRF) as part of the monetary policy implementation framework, see Board of Governors (2019a).
The current repo operations are conducted with only primary dealers and are designed to ensure a consistently ample supply of reserves to the banking system and support better interest rate control.
As designed, these repos may have little effect on bank demand for reserves because the repo operations do not provide liquidity against HQLA to a wide range of bank counterparties.
A facility intended to affect reserve demand may therefore require different design features.

By transforming payments, digitalization has the potential to deliver greater value and convenience at lower cost.
Some of the new players are outside the financial system's regulatory guardrails, and their new currencies could pose challenges in areas such as illicit finance, privacy, financial stability, and monetary policy transmission.
Given the stakes, the public sector must engage in order to ensure that the payments infrastructure is safe as well as efficient and fast, assess whether regulatory perimeters need to be redrawn or new approaches are needed in areas such as consumer data and identity authentication, and explore the role of central bank digital currencies in ensuring sovereign currencies stay at the center of each nation's financial system.
The operations of banks and some related financial service providers, such as card companies, are subject to regulatory oversight for sound risk management.
Banks offer important consumer protections, including deposit insurance, error resolution, and fraud protection.
In addition to providing payments services, banks generally provide credit, with deposits providing stable funding.
Many banks rely at least in part on legacy technology.
In China, the majority of consumers and businesses participate in two mobile payment networks, Alipay and WeChat Pay, which by some accounts handled more than $37 trillion in mobile payments in 2018.2 BigTechs and FinTechs typically leverage cloud-based platforms and computing power, along with mobile applications, often to provide different combinations of services and enhanced user experiences.
These network benefits may be augmented by leveraging economies of scale and scope in user data for a host of purposes, from prioritizing which information is pushed to users to allocating and pricing credit to sharing reviews.
It has the potential to enhance financial inclusion by expanding the number and diversity of ways people gain access to financial services and by creating more consumer friendly offerings.
A Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) study found that 8.4 million households are unbanked and an additional 24 million are underbanked.3 These households often rely on more-expensive means of payments, including nonbank providers and bank money orders.
Many have smartphones, which could facilitate access to payment apps.
Statutory and regulatory protections on bank accounts in the United States mean that consumers can reasonably expect their deposits to be insured up to a limit; their banks to be held to strong data security standards; many fraudulent transactions to be the liability of the bank; transfers to be available within specified periods; and clear, standardized disclosures about account fees and interest payments to be readily available.
Unlike many foreign central banks, the Federal Reserve does not have plenary authority over payment systems.
The Federal Reserve has broad authority over payment systems that are designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council or that are chartered as entities for which the Federal Reserve is the primary supervisor.
These authorities cover two large-value interbank payment systems but no retail payment system to date.
The banking agencies may oversee certain aspects of a nonbank payment system to the extent there is a bank nexus, under the Bank Service Company Act, or bank affiliation, under the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.4 However, this oversight will be quite limited to the extent that nonbank players reduce or eliminate the nexus to banks, such as when technology firms develop payments services connected to digital wallets rather than bank accounts and rely on digital currencies rather than sovereign currencies as the means of exchange.
Given the growing role of nonbank technology players in payments, a review of the nation's oversight framework for retail payment systems could be helpful to identify important gaps.
A good place to start may be contrasting the U.S.
Many foreign central banks, for example, have explicit authority for general retail payments oversight.5 Moreover, most jurisdictions require that payment systems obtain a license and/or registration before commencing operations.
A 2018 World Bank study found that the large majority of jurisdictions have some sort of license and/or registration requirement for mobile money platforms, payment card networks or switches, or clearinghouses.6 The United States requires registration of a money transmitter at the federal level for purposes of Bank Secrecy Act/Anti-Money-Laundering compliance, but it does not require broader federal oversight of payment system operators.7
In contrast to other jurisdictions where there is explicit responsibility for broad regulation of payment systems, the Federal Reserve's role as an operator has instead long formed the basis of the U.S.
Since the Federal Reserve Banks opened for business around the country in 1914, as directed by the Congress, they have provided payment and settlement services in competition with private-sector providers.
While new players are making important contributions to the digital transformation of payments, it is critical that consumers and businesses can achieve the same speed and efficiency using their trusted deposit account providers with the safety and security they have come to expect.
Immediate access to funds could be especially important for households on fixed incomes or living paycheck to paycheck, when waiting days for the funds to be available to pay a bill can mean overdraft fees or late fees that can compound.
The latest evolution in the payments infrastructure is faster payments, in which the payment message is transmitted and funds are settled between banks and made irrevocably available to recipients in real (or near-real) time.
We are committed to closing the gap between the transaction capabilities in the digital economy and the underlying payment and settlement capabilities.
Recognizing that consumers and businesses across the country want and expect real-time payments, and the banks they trust should be able to provide this service securely, this summer, the Federal Reserve announced that it is building its first new payments rail in more than forty years—the FedNow Service.8 FedNow will facilitate end-to-end faster payment services, increase competition, and ensure equitable and ubiquitous access to banks of all sizes nationwide.
Together, the Clearing House's RTP and FedNow are moving the U.S.
RTP and FedNow should significantly increase the speed and efficiency of the U.S.
Given the importance of safety in faster payments, providing access to more than one real-time payment service for back-up purposes will enhance resiliency.
The Federal Reserve has always had a vital role in the payment system by providing liquidity and operational continuity in times of stress, and FedNow will extend this role into the real-time retail payments market.
Some stakeholders noted that a single provider that is owned and operated by one segment of the payment industry may focus on a limited set of use cases instead of the full breadth of possible use cases for faster payments.
The comment period for the Federal Register notice seeking public input into FedNow features and designs closed in November, and we are analyzing the nearly 200 letters submitted.9 We understand the urgency among stakeholders to launch FedNow quickly with features that support safe, efficient, and ubiquitous faster payments.
Digital transformation of payments extends not only to the systems and players, but also to the medium of exchange.10 The existing payments system combines central bank money, commercial bank money, and certain kinds of nonbank private money, which provide a medium of exchange based on the U.S.
By contrast, some technology players have payment systems based on their own digital currency rather than the sovereign currency.
Depending on their design and scale, private digital-currency-based payment systems could magnify concerns surrounding illicit activity and consumer risk, while potentially creating challenges for the public sector's ability to safeguard financial stability and use monetary policy to buffer the economy.
Central bank money is important for payment systems because it represents a safe settlement asset, allowing users to exchange central bank liabilities with confidence in their acceptance and reliability.
In the United States, central bank money is composed of paper currency and money held in deposits at the Federal Reserve Banks.
Commercial bank money—money held in deposits at commercial banks—is widely used because consumers and businesses trust that the money they deposit with a commercial bank can be converted, on demand, into a claim on another commercial bank's money or currency.
This confidence owes in large part to bank deposit insurance and the fact that commercial banks are supervised and regulated.
dollar as the unit of account exists on a smaller scale for a variety of consumer uses, particularly in closed-loop payment systems like prepaid cards and digital wallets.
Although various federal and state laws establish protections for users, issuers of nonbank money are not regulated to the same extent as banks, the value stored in these systems is not insured directly by the FDIC, and consumers may be at risk that the issuer will not be able to honor its liabilities.
The private sector is exploring uses of distributed ledger technologies to create a wide range of payment instruments, some that are designed to resemble traditional commercial bank money, some that look similar to Bitcoin, and some that have attributes more similar to securities.
One important design choice is whether a digital currency is account-based or token-based.
From an accounting perspective, there is an account structure for the asset owner and for the asset itself.
Individual accounts could take the form of traditional account structures of commercial banks or be pseudo-anonymous.
The accounting of the asset itself could take the form of debiting and crediting account balances or tracking of specific "tokens." Another key design consideration is the method for authenticating the asset owner—to open an account and to make transactions.
Private-sector digital currencies vary in important ways with regard to whether they are linked in a legally binding way to a sovereign currency.
Bitcoin has not achieved widespread acceptance as a means of payment or unit of account because of its extreme volatility, as well as limited throughput capacity, unpredictable transaction costs, limited or no governance, and limited transparency.
Stablecoins were designed specifically to overcome the volatility of first-generation cryptocurrencies by tying the digital currency to an asset or basket of assets, such as commercial bank deposits or government-issued bonds.
Unlike first-generation cryptocurrencies, they may be issued by a central entity and rely on third-party institutions for some aspects.
But even within this broad class of digital currencies, stablecoins vary widely in their underlying reference assets and the associated "exchange rate," the ability to redeem the stablecoin claims for the underlying assets, and the extent to which a central issuer is liable for making good on redemption rights.
Because Facebook has an active user network of one-third of the global population, the company's Libra global stablecoin project has imparted urgency to the debate over what form money can take, who or what can issue it, and how payments can be recorded and settled.
Any stablecoin project with global scale and scope faces a core set of legal and regulatory challenges.
Not only is it not clear what protections or recourse consumers would have with regard to their global stablecoin transactions and balances, but it is also not clear how much price risk consumers will face in cases where they do not appear to have claims on the stablecoin's underlying assets.
The precise nature of the risk would be driven in part by how the stablecoin is tied to an asset (if at all), the underlying legal arrangements, and the features of the asset itself.
For smaller economies, there may be material effects on monetary policy from private-sector digital currencies as well as foreign central bank digital currencies.
In many respects, these effects may be the digital version of "dollarization," with the potential for a faster pace and wider scope of adoption.

The prospect for rapid adoption of global stablecoin payment systems has intensified calls for central banks to issue digital currencies in order to maintain the sovereign currency as the anchor of the nation's payment systems.
In a Bank for International Settlements survey of 66 central banks, more than 80 percent of central banks report being engaged in some type of central bank digital currency (CBDC) work.12 The motivations for this work range from payments safety and robustness for advanced economies to payments efficiency for emerging economies.
The latest survey suggests there is greater openness to issuing a CBDC than a year ago, and a few central banks report that they are moving forward with issuing a CBDC.
Given the dollar's important role, it is essential that we remain on the frontier of research and policy development regarding CBDC.
Like other central banks, we are conducting research and experimentation related to distributed ledger technologies and their potential use case for digital currencies, including the potential for a CBDC.
We are collaborating with other central banks as we advance our understanding of central bank digital currencies.
context, there are policy and design issues to explore, as well as legal considerations.
It is important to consider whether a new form of digital central bank liability might improve the payment system, taking into account the innovations offered by the private sector.
We would need to consider whether adding a new form of central bank liability would reduce operational vulnerabilities from a safety and resilience perspective.
With regard to cross-border payments, it is important to consider what would be required in terms of cross-border cooperation for CBDCs to address current frictions and reduce costs.
It is also vital to consider the implications for the broader financial system of the issuance of a CBDC.
In light of considerations of privacy and guarding against illicit activity, issuance of a digital currency would raise important questions about what kinds of intermediaries might provide CBDC transaction accounts for consumers.
While some proposals are centered on commercial bank intermediaries, others propose new types of intermediaries that might develop with a narrow focus on payments.
Related to this, the design of any CBDC needs to address important questions surrounding financial stability.
A variety of approaches have been put forward to address the potential run risk associated with the ability to convert commercial bank deposits into CBDC with a simple swipe.14
It is important to understand how the existing provisions of the Federal Reserve Act with regard to currency issuance apply to the CBDC.
It is also important to consider whether CBDC would have legal tender status, depending on the design.
While the legal framework is well-established with regard to the rights and protections for Federal Reserve notes in the current system, it is untested for new instruments such as CBDC and, more generally, other digital currencies.
A different approach may be necessary to ensure that holders of CBDC have appropriate protections, including privacy rights, fraud protection, digital identity safeguards, and data protection.
These are some of the issues that would need to be addressed before deciding to issue a CBDC in the United States.
Some of the motivations for a CBDC cited by other jurisdictions, such as rapidly declining cash use, weak financial institutions, and underdeveloped payment systems, are not shared by the United States.
dollar continues to rise because of robust demand, and the dollar plays an important role globally.
We have a robust and diverse banking system that provides important services, along with a widely available and expanding variety of digital payment options.
While the potential for seamlessly integrated and lower-cost transactions brings important benefits, digitalization also brings risks.
In the United States no less than in other major economies, the public sector needs to engage actively with the private sector and the research community to consider whether new guardrails need to be established, whether existing regulatory perimeters need to be redrawn, and whether a CBDC would deliver important benefits on net.
I am grateful to Paul Wong and Jacqueline Cremos of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System for their assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households 2017 (PDF) (Washington: FDIC, October 2018).
The Bank Service Company Act grants the federal banking agencies the authority to regulate and examine third-party service providers that perform certain services for supervised banks.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Act provides the banking agencies with enforcement powers to address unsafe and unsound practices, violations, and breaches of fiduciary duty by supervised banks and their institution-affiliated parties.
Bank for International Settlements, Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems, Policy Issues for Central Banks in Retail Payments (PDF) (Basel: BIS, March 2003).
In some countries—such as Australia, the Netherlands, and Singapore—the central bank oversees all retail payment systems, whereas in others—such as Canada, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom—the central bank oversees systemically important payments, while another authority oversees payments that are not systemically important.
World Bank Group, Payment Systems Worldwide: A Snapshot (PDF) (Washington: World Bank, September 2018).
For example, PayPal and Square are organized as money services businesses in the United States and subject to regulation by most states, while PayPal is organized as a bank in Luxembourg, and Square is licensed as an authorized payment institution in the United Kingdom.
See Lael Brainard, "Delivering Fast Payments for All," (PDF) (remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Town Hall, Kansas City, Missouri, August 5, 2019).
Federal Reserve Actions to Support Interbank Settlement of Faster Payments, 84 Fed.
See also Tobias Adrian and Tommaso Mancini-Griffoli, The Rise of Digital Money (Washington: International Monetary Fund, July 2019), and Darrell Duffie, Digital Currencies and Fast Payment Systems: Disruption is Coming (Stanford, CA: Graduate School of Business, Stanford University, May 2019).
Cordruta Boar, Henry Holden, and Amber Wadsworth, Impending Arrival—A Sequel to the Survey on Central Bank Digital Currency (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, January 2020).
Michael Kumhof and Clare Noone, "Central Bank Digital Currencies—Design Principles and Balance Sheet Implications," Bank of England Staff Working Paper no.

Spontaneity and Order: Transparency, Accountability, and Fairness in Bank Supervision
This afternoon, I would like to talk with you about the outwardly mundane but increasingly consequential topic of bank supervision.
The structure and content of regulation was both intellectually interesting and professionally meaningful; I considered bank supervision, by contrast, as both too workaday and too straightforward to merit the commitment of much legal horsepower or personal attention.
Having now been immersed for the last two years both in the practice of supervision and in the complementary relationship between the regulatory and supervisory processes, I realize that this wasn't true then, and is certainly not true now.
It is not a drafting accident that the Dodd-Frank Act gave my position at the Federal Reserve the title of Vice Chairman for Supervision.
Notwithstanding the extensive reform of bank regulation after the crisis, which has had much consequence for the industry (most of it salutary) it is the process of examination and supervision that constitutes the bulk of our ongoing engagement with the industry and through which our policy objectives are given effect.
This division of labor is important for lawyers and policymakers to think about deeply because the processes of regulation and supervision are necessarily different in crucial respects.
Because a rule is designed to apply generally, rules must be based on general principles intended to achieve general aims, rather than reverse-engineered to generate specific effects for specific institutions.
Given their general applicability, there must be a general process for all those with an interest—industry, academics, citizens, Congress—to have notice of, and opportunity to comment on all rules, ensuring that all potential effects and points of view are taken into account in the rule's crafting.
Supervision, by contrast, implements the regulatory framework through close engagement with the particular facts about particular firms: their individual capital and liquidity positions, the diverse composition of their distinct portfolios of assets, their business strategies, the nature of their operations, the strengths and weaknesses of their management.
Given the strong public interest in the safe, sound, and efficient operation of the financial industry and the potential for hair-raising and widespread adverse social consequences of private misjudgment or misconduct in that industry, close and regular supervision of this sort can help us all sleep restfully.
In the United States, we have a long-standing, well-articulated framework for ensuring that regulations conform with the principles of generality, predictability, publicity, and consultation described above.
We have a public interest in a confidential, tailored, rapid-acting and closely informed system of bank supervision.
And we have a public interest in all governmental processes being fair, predictable, efficient, and accountable.
In delegating to agencies such as the Fed the significant power to write regulations, Congress has codified a regulatory process that emphasizes transparency.
This process was born in the 1930s, in the tumult of government expansion that was the New Deal, when Congress began a decade-long debate over how to manage the new regulatory state.
The wisdom behind this approach is that fairness both helps bring forth more considered and effective regulations and builds respect for and adherence to the law, which is essential for enforcement.
Transparency is central to our ability to assert that our rules are fair.
Banks are subjected to supervision, in addition to regulation, as an additional form of government oversight because of their complexity, opacity, vulnerability to runs, and indispensable role in the economy, enabling payments, transmitting monetary policy, and providing credit.
The government provides a safety net to banks in the form of deposit insurance, and in return, banks are subject to government oversight that mimics some of the monitoring that the private sector would provide, absent the government safety net.
The bank regulatory framework sets the core architectural requirements for the banking system, but it isn't enough to set the rules and walk away like Voltaire's god.
The potential consequences of disruption in the financial system are so far-reaching, and the erosion of market discipline resulting from the government safety net sufficiently material, that it is neither safe nor reasonable to rely entirely on after-the-fact enforcement to ensure regulatory compliance.
And in addition to what they do at individual banks, supervisors monitor for risk that may be building among clusters of banks or across the banking system.
These "horizontal" exams across multiple banks help highlight new or emerging risks and help examiners understand how banks are managing these risks.
Through their engagement with banks, supervisors promote good risk management and thus help banks preemptively avert excessive risk taking that would be costly and inefficient to correct after the fact.
Where banks fall materially out of compliance with a regulatory framework or act in a manner that poses a threat to their safety and soundness, supervisors can act rapidly to address the failures that led to the lack of compliance or threat to safety and soundness.
This is a crucial point: Supervision is most effective when expectations are clear and supervision promotes an approach to risk management that deters bad behavior and decisions by banks.
Supervisors rely on banks to be frank and forthcoming, and supervisors in turn can help secure that frankness by explaining what their expectations are and why their expectations are reasonable, not arbitrary or capricious.
I don't believe the Federal Reserve has communicated as clearly as it could with the banks we supervise.
More transparency and more clarity about what we want to achieve as supervisors and how we approach our work will improve supervision, and I have several specific proposals.
Broadly speaking, these actions fall into three categories: (1) large bank supervision, (2) transparency improvements, and (3) overall supervisory process improvements.
This was entirely consistent with a principle at the heart of our existing work: Firms that pose greater risks should meet higher standards and receive more scrutiny.
Our previous rules relied heavily on a firm's total assets as a proxy for these risks and for the costs the financial system would incur if a firm failed.
This simple asset proxy was clear and critical, rough and ready, but neither risk sensitive nor complete.
Our new rules employ a broader set of indicators, like short-term wholesale funding and off-balance-sheet exposures, to assess the need for greater supervisory scrutiny.
That said, the composition of our supervisory portfolios has not yet been aligned with our recent tailoring rules.
For example, the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) portfolio includes all Category I firms, which have the greatest risk profile, along with certain Category II and Category III firms, which are less systemic.
Other Category II and Category III firms, on the other hand, are supervised under our large and foreign banking organizations (LFBO) portfolio.
Since the crisis, we have been giving significant thought to the composition of our supervisory portfolios, and, in particular to whether and how we should address the significant decrease in size and risk profile of the foreign firms in the LISCC portfolio over the past decade.
Because of these changes, which I will describe in more detail momentarily, I believe there is a compelling justification to make changes today to the composition of the foreign banks in the LISCC portfolio.
Separately and in keeping with the goal of transparency, I think it is important that all the Fed's supervisory portfolios have a clear and transparent definition.
Today nearly all of our supervisory portfolios have such a crisp and clear formulaic definition specified in the public domain, but the LISCC portfolio does not.
My preferred approach for achieving this objective would be to align the LISCC portfolio with our recent tailoring categorizations.
The justification for this line-drawing is that Category I firms pose the most systemic risk and require the most supervisory attention.
In this state of the world, Category II and III firms would remain subject to heightened supervisory standards that are commensurate with their risk profile.
Allow me to draw out what this approach could mean for the foreign banks that currently are in the LISCC portfolio.
Since 2010, these four banks have significantly shrunk their U.S.
Since 2008, the size of the LISCC FBOs' combined U.S.
In addition, the estimated systemic impact of the LISCC FBOs today is much smaller than the U.S.
The average method 1 GSIB score of the combined U.S.
operations of the LISCC FBOs is less than a quarter of the average GSIB score of the six non-processing U.S.
Thus, if any foreign banks move out of the LISCC portfolio based on this de-risking, they would move into the LFBO portfolio, where they would be supervised alongside other foreign and domestic firms with similar risk profiles.
Notably, this change in supervisory portfolio would have no effect on the regulatory capital or liquidity requirements that currently apply to the four LISCC FBOs.
The Manual contains a description of the main supervisory processes for identifying risks and our approach for addressing them.
Publishing the Manual would help the public and the banks better understand why we take the actions that we take as supervisors and would demystify some of our processes.
If we took these two simple steps—defining LISCC firms and publishing the Program Manual that governs our supervisory approach—it would go a long way in helping to make our supervisory practices more understandable and accessible without undermining supervisory effectiveness.
A firm's supervisory rating, which is confidential, is important because it affects things such as the firm's ability to engage in mergers and acquisitions and to enter new lines of business.
Just over a year ago, the Board began implementing a new ratings framework for large holding companies called the large financial institutions (LFI) ratings framework.
We inaugurated the LFI ratings framework for LISCC firms in January 2019 and for other large holding companies at the beginning of this year.
As we gain more experience with LFI, we will be paying close attention to how the new rating system is working and whether it is achieving its intended purpose.
There are two features of the ratings system that I will be particularly interested to monitor, and which may well require adjustment.
These are the embedding of qualitative "risk management" standards in the capital and liquidity components of the ratings (as opposed to standardized quantitative measures of capital and liquidity adequacy) and the ascetic principle by which a firm's "well managed" status is determined by its lowest component rating, no matter how good the bank is at everything else.
Regarding our stress tests under the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), I continue to look for ways to make the tests more transparent without making them game-able and without diluting their potency as a supervisory tool.
First, I expect that we will continue to provide more transparency on the models used in CCAR.
We also continue to consider ways to increase the transparency around the scenarios we use in CCAR, including, for example, by modifying our scenario design policy statement to provide greater transparency on the design of the global market shock component of the stress tests.
Second, I expect that as part of the stress capital buffer, we will give banks significantly more time to review their stress test results and understand their capital requirements before we demand their final capital plan.
Firms are currently permitted to revise and resubmit their capital plans after receiving their stress test results.
But it is done on a short timeframe, and allowing additional time would produce better results without in any way reducing the stringency of the stress tests.
Fundamentally, I think banks will be better able to do intelligent capital planning if we provide them with their complete set of regulatory capital requirements before we require submission of a capital plan.
Third and finally, we continue to look for ways to reduce the volatility of stress-test requirements from year to year.
We are considering a number of options, such as averaging outcomes over multiple years or averaging the results of the current year's stress test with the results of one or more previous years.
Again, the goal here is not to make the tests less strenuous but to give banks a greater opportunity to plan for them and to meet our expectations ex ante rather than through an ex post remedial process.
Regulatory interpretations by Board staff have grown piecemeal over the decades and haven't consistently been treated as the valuable resource they are.
The Board's website has select interpretations of many laws but does not provide a comprehensive, user-friendly collection of regulatory interpretations, FAQs, and commentary.
The second of these transparency actions would be putting significant supervisory guidance out for public comment.
The Board already invites comments on its regulations, as required under the APA, and regularly invites comment on some supervisory guidance and statements of policy.
I would like the Board to seek comment on more supervisory guidance going forward.
Third and finally, as another improvement related to guidance, I support submitting significant supervisory guidance to Congress for purposes of the Congressional Review Act.
I support doing so for significant guidance because significant guidance, though nonbinding, can still have a material impact on bank behavior.
I believe this step would enhance the Fed's accountability and help build support for supervisory guidance.
The first is to increase the ability of supervised firms to share Federal Reserve confidential supervisory information (CSI) with employees, affiliates, service providers, and other government agencies to promote greater compliance with laws and facilitate the response to enforcement actions.
We have received feedback that our rules can prevent banks from sharing CSI with a wide variety of relevant parties who need to know this information in order to help the bank remediate identified supervisory issues.
The second process improvement is having the Board adopt a rule on how we use guidance in the supervisory process.
I would expect the rule to state that the Board will follow and respect the limits of administrative law in carrying out its supervisory responsibilities.
In particular, consistent with the September 2018 interagency statement on guidance, we would affirm the sensible principles that guidance is not binding and "non-compliance" with guidance may not form the basis for an enforcement action (such as a cease-and-desist order) or supervisory criticism (such as a Matter Requiring Attention (MRA)).
This rule would be binding on the Board and on all staff of the Federal Reserve System, including bank examiners.
The third and fourth process improvements relate to supervisory communication.
This approach would provide supervisors with a tool—supervisory recommendations—for continuing to raise concerns about less pressing supervisory matters while focusing a bank's attention on the most urgent matters, those that would receive MRAs.
We removed this category of supervisory commentary in 2013 to better focus bank management on deficiencies found during the supervision process.
(By way of comparison, both the FDIC and OCC retained this tool.) On reflection, I think there is value in supervisory observations.
They allow an examiner to give notice about a supervisory concern even if that concern has not risen to the level of an MRA.
MRAs are supervisory communications that identify areas where banks are out of compliance with applicable legal standards or otherwise are engaged in practices that create substantial safety and soundness risks.
Nevertheless, MRAs carry weight because they can affect a bank's supervisory rating.
In limiting MRAs to legal violations and significant supervisory concerns, we would take care to clearly define the breadth of what constitutes a "material safety and soundness issue." This distinction is important as a matter of fairness.
Banks should be able to understand the line between MRAs significant enough to affect the bank's supervisory rating and less significant matters that don't affect a bank's supervisory rating but raise concerns that should be considered by banks.
Together, the third and fourth process improvements would be calibrated to improve communications so that banks can focus on remediating key weaknesses while maintaining awareness of emerging ones.
Ultimately, a bank that promptly corrects its material safety and soundness weaknesses will be better able to serve its customers and intermediate credit through a range of scenarios, including under stress.
The final process improvement is to make routine our existing practice of having an independent review of important supervisory communications and guidance documents.
We want to make sure that our supervisory communications, including MRAs, focus on violations of law and material safety and soundness issues and that these communications don't mistakenly give the impression that supervisory guidance is binding.
We already closely scrutinize MRAs issued to the LISCC firms and in horizontal reviews of other large domestic and foreign banks.
This extra scrutiny is a sensible practice that should be regularized and expanded across our supervisory portfolios.
As I mentioned, the Board adopted a final tailoring rule last year that adjusted the regulatory standards applicable to banks, based on their risk profile.
I think it would be useful for us to review our guidance in light of this tailoring exercise, such as guidance on stress testing and capital planning, and to update the scope of guidance where appropriate.
Obviously, the incremental changes to our supervisory processes described above do not completely answer the question with which I began my remarks today: How can we square the public interest in agile supervision with the public interest in transparency and accountability? This should be an ongoing question of high priority, both at the Fed and more broadly among those who care about our system of financial regulation.
The changes to supervision since the crisis have made the financial system stronger and more resilient than it was before.
The incremental changes I have outlined, to increase transparency, accountability, and fairness, would make supervision more efficient and effective, and our financial system stronger and more stable.

At the 2020 Economic Forecast Breakfast, Home Builders Association of Greater Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri
Few sectors are as central to the success of our economy and the lives of American families as housing.
If we include the amount families spend on shelter each month as well as the construction of new houses and apartments, housing generates about 15 cents out of every dollar of economic activity.
In our time together today, I'd like to discuss the outlook for housing at the national level and also look at the labor force and credit challenges facing your industry.1
Let me start with just a few words about the overall economic picture.
economy is currently in a good place, and the baseline outlook of participants on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) is for continued moderate growth in gross domestic product (GDP) over the next few years.
Unemployment is the lowest it has been in 50 years, and FOMC participants expect it to remain low.
Inflation has been muted and is expected to rise gradually to the FOMC's 2 percent objective.
One of the most remarkable features of the current economic expansion has been the vitality and resilience of the U.S.
More than 22 million jobs have been created since the low point for employment at the end of the last downturn, and the pace of job gains has been amazingly consistent.
But the unbroken string of job gains that we have experienced during this recovery highlights how our economy has kept humming along during this past decade, weathering the occasional lull.
Let me also add here that, as good as the national numbers for the job market look, things seem even better here in the Kansas City area, where job growth has been steady and the unemployment rate has consistently run around 1 percentage point below the national average—at last count, it was 2.8 percent.
My colleagues and I at the Federal Reserve pay close attention to developments in the housing sector, in part because it has historically been such an important driver of economic growth.
In the national economic data, the part of GDP that includes homebuilding activity is referred to as residential fixed investment.
If we look at the growth of residential fixed investment in periods since World War II that are defined as economic expansions, we see that this broad category has increased at an average rate of around 7 percent per year, faster than the roughly 4 percent pace of GDP growth in those same periods.
And, as many of you know from experience, the opposite is true as well—that housing activity tends to experience relatively large declines in economic downturns.
In particular, residential fixed investment declined an average of about 15 percent annually during periods defined as recessions, compared with an average annual rate of decline in GDP of just 2 percent in those same periods.
The strong economy we are experiencing now has an obvious upside for the housing sector: A robust job market translates into higher incomes, greater confidence, and more people looking to buy a new home or considering whether to make a change from their current home.
Part of the weak recovery in the housing market during the first few years of this expansion can be traced to extremely tight mortgage credit conditions.
Despite the fact that the Fed slashed interest rates and kept them low for many years, many households were underwater on their existing mortgages, with more owed on their housing than their homes were worth, while others were unable to obtain a loan to finance a new purchase.
Another factor that played a role in the slow housing recovery was the low rate of household formation, which dropped significantly during the recession and remained low for most of the following decade.
Much of this drop was due to a larger share of young people continuing to live with their parents, though this is not unusual when the economy is weak and jobs are hard to find.2
In the past few years, though, we have seen some encouraging signs that the broader strength in the economy has eased these housing market headwinds.
Along with ongoing improvements in households' balance sheet conditions, mortgage credit conditions appear to be less of a constraint for creditworthy borrowers.
I should add that housing activity is also being supported by interest rates that remain quite low by historical standards, with the fixed rate charged on a 30-year mortgage now below 4 percent, substantially lower than the rates observed just before the last recession.
As you well know, activity in the housing sector is highly sensitive to interest rates and other factors that have a powerful effect on the overall cost of owning a home.
In addition, amid the strong job market of the past few years, we have seen a rise in the rate at which young adults are moving out of their family homes and forming households of their own.
While their reasons for doing so are probably varied, there is potential for many more individuals to shift back to forming new households.
Although the effects may evolve slowly, the higher rate of household formation will eventually result in higher demand for housing and encourage further increases in homebuilding.
In fact, at this point, the residential real estate market is quite tight in some areas of the country and by enough that I have heard that the volume of home sales is being restricted by the low inventory of homes on the market.
In all, the national indicators suggest a positive growth outlook for the housing sector over the next several quarters.
To provide some context, the national data show that the unemployment rate in the private construction industry is now well below the rate we observed in the early 2000s, a time when the housing market was booming.
In addition, the ratio of job vacancies to unemployment in the construction industry—a measure of labor market strength—shot up to historic highs at the end of 2018, and it has remained near those levels.
In response to these hiring-related challenges, we have seen a renewed and broad focus on workforce development initiatives by the public and private sector, a development we have followed closely at the Federal Reserve.
The second challenge I want to highlight relates to the declining presence of community banks in the consumer real estate mortgage market.
As regulatory burdens have risen, many community banks have significantly scaled back their lending or exited the mortgage market altogether.
Home mortgage lending has traditionally been a significant business for smaller banks, and the decline in this business threatens a part of the banking industry that plays a crucial role in communities.
Bankers who are present and active in their communities know and understand their customers and the local market better than lenders outside the area.
Because of their local knowledge and customer relationships, they are often more willing to help troubled borrowers work their way through difficult times.
I expect construction to continue advancing to meet the underlying expansion in housing demand from population growth and the strong economy.
In addition, low interest rates will continue to be a key factor supporting growth in housing activity.
As reported in the latest Summary of Economic Projections, released in December, most FOMC participants see the current target range for the federal funds rate as likely to remain appropriate this year as long as incoming information remains broadly consistent with the economic outlook I described earlier.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
See, for example, Aditya Aladangady, Laura Feiveson, and Andrew Paciorek (2019), "Living at Home Ain't Such a Drag (on Spending): Young Adults' Spending in and out of Their Parents' Home," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 5).

Peter McColough Series on International Economics, Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York
As some of you may know, I am a longtime member of the Council on Foreign Relations and have attended and participated in many such events over the past 20 years, although I will point out that in my previous visits to the dais, I was in the somewhat less demanding position of asking the questions rather than answering them.
I am really looking forward to this conversation, but I would like first to share with you some thoughts about the outlook for the U.S.
The unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, inflation is close to our 2 percent objective, gross domestic product growth is solid, and the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) baseline outlook is for a continuation of this performance in 2020.2 At present, personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price inflation is running somewhat below our 2 percent objective, but we project that, under appropriate monetary policy, inflation will rise gradually to our symmetric 2 percent objective.
Although the unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, wages are rising broadly in line with productivity growth and underlying inflation.
We are not seeing any evidence to date that a strong labor market is putting excessive cost-push pressure on price inflation.
economy are similar to our projections at this time one year ago, but over the course of 2019, the FOMC shifted the stance of U.S.
monetary policy to offset some significant global growth headwinds and global disinflationary pressures.
In 2019, sluggish growth abroad and global developments weighed on investment, exports, and manufacturing in the United States, although there are some indications that headwinds to global growth may be beginning to abate.
Over the 12 months through November, PCE inflation was running at 1.5 percent, and core PCE inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices and is a better measure of underlying inflation, was running at 1.6 percent.
Moreover, inflation expectations, those measured by both surveys and market prices, have moved lower and reside at the low end of a range I consider consistent with our price-stability mandate.
The shift in the stance of monetary policy that we undertook in 2019 was, I believe, well timed and has been providing support to the economy and helping to keep the U.S.
I believe that monetary policy is in a good place and should continue to support sustained growth, a strong labor market, and inflation running close to our symmetric 2 percent objective.
As long as incoming information about the economy remains broadly consistent with this outlook, the current stance of monetary policy likely will remain appropriate.
Looking ahead, monetary policy is not on a preset course.
The Committee will proceed on a meeting-by-meeting basis and will be monitoring the effects of our recent policy actions along with other information bearing on the outlook as we assess the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate.
In January 2019, my FOMC colleagues and I affirmed that we aim to operate with an ample level of bank reserves in the U.S.
As we enter 2020, let me emphasize that we stand ready to adjust the details of this program as appropriate and in line with our goal, which is to keep the federal funds rate in the target range desired by the FOMC.
As the minutes of the December FOMC meeting suggest, it may be appropriate to gradually transition away from active repo operations this year as Treasury bill purchases supply a larger base of reserves, though some repo might be needed at least through April, when tax payments will sharply reduce reserve levels.
This review—with public engagement unprecedented in scope for us—is the first of its kind for the Federal Reserve.
We are drawing on these insights as we assess how best to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability.
We will continue reporting on our discussions in the minutes of FOMC meetings and will share our conclusions with the public when we conclude the review later this year.5
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
I am grateful to Brian Doyle of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.
The most recent Summary of Economic Projections is an addendum to the minutes of the December 2019 FOMC meeting.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2020), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, December 10–11, 2019," press release, January 3.
See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190130c.htm.
Also see the Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans, available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190320c.htm.
See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation, which can be found on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20191011a.htm.

Strengthening the Community Reinvestment Act by Staying True to Its Core Purpose
I am pleased to be here at the Urban Institute to discuss how to strengthen the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), which is a key priority for the Federal Reserve.
The CRA plays a vital role in bringing banks together with community members, small businesses, local officials, and community groups to make investments in their community's future.1 That is why we are committed to getting CRA reform done right.
The CRA was one of several landmark pieces of legislation enacted in the wake of the civil rights movement intended to address inequities in the credit markets.
By passing the CRA, Congress aimed to reverse the disinvestment associated with years of government policies and market actions that deprived lower-income areas of credit by redlining—using red-inked lines to separate neighborhoods deemed too risky.2 By conferring an affirmative and continuing obligation on banks to help meet the credit needs in all of the neighborhoods they serve, the CRA has not only prompted banks to be more active lenders in LMI areas, but also important participants in multisector efforts to revitalize communities across the country.
Pursuant to guidance from the Board of Governors, each of our Federal Reserve Banks houses a group of dedicated community development professionals and CRA examiners to help banks meet their CRA obligations.
We are proud of our work in familiarizing banks with the CRA's provisions, introducing banks to potential partners in their communities, and convening conferences to disseminate research and best practices.3
The CRA plays a vital role in the ecosystem supporting economic opportunity in LMI communities in both rural and urban areas.
Rather than direct funds to specific projects, the CRA encourages banks to engage on the priorities identified by local leaders and more broadly serve credit needs of small businesses and residents of these communities.
By being inclusive in their lending and investing, banks help their local communities to thrive, which in turn benefits their core business.
The recognition of this mutually beneficial relationship between banks and their local communities is one of the core strengths of the CRA and the reason our effort to revise the CRA regulations must focus on local needs and stakeholder input.
For several years, the federal banking regulators have been asking stakeholders for input on strengthening the CRA regulations to help banks better meet the credit needs of the local LMI communities they serve and more closely align with changes in the ways financial products and services are delivered.
We also have heard calls from banking and community organizations for the use of metrics to provide greater upfront clarity about evaluation standards.
We have heard that branches remain as important as ever to their local communities, even as the growth of mobile and online services has extended the geographic area that banks are serving.4 The one message we have heard most consistently is that banks and community organizations alike value the activities they undertake under the auspices of the CRA and have invested considerable time and effort in the associated processes and reporting.5 For that reason, stakeholders have asked the regulators to take care as we contemplate changes to the CRA.6
So it is much more important to get reform right than to do it quickly.
It is critical to analyze carefully the likely effects of any proposed changes on credit access and community development in LMI communities, as well as any additional reporting and procedural burdens for banks.
Last year, we set out several principles to guide our work on CRA reform.7 Revisions to the CRA regulations should reflect the credit needs of local communities and work consistently through the business cycle.
They should be tailored to banks of different sizes and business strategies.
They should encourage banks to seek opportunities in distressed and underserved areas.
Guided by stakeholder input, we evaluated how to strengthen the regulation by using metrics to provide greater certainty about how activities will be evaluated, while remaining faithful to the core purpose of the CRA to make credit and retail banking services available in local LMI communities.
Proposed changes to the CRA regulation must be grounded in analysis and data to avoid unintended consequences.
Because consistent data on CRA-eligible activity were not readily available, our research staff set about creating a database based on over 6,000 written public CRA evaluations from a sample of some 3,700 banks of varying asset sizes, business models, geographic areas, and bank regulators.8 The database includes the location, number, and amount of CRA-eligible loans and investments and the ratings associated with each bank's performance.
The data go back to 2005 in order to assess how CRA performance and the associated ratings vary across the economic cycle.
So how can we use metrics to provide greater clarity about evaluations? I will sketch out a proposed approach that uses a set of tailored thresholds that are calibrated for local conditions.
It starts by creating two tests: a retail test and community development test (figure 1).
Broadly speaking, all retail banks would be evaluated under a retail test, which would assess a bank's record of providing retail loans and retail banking services in its assessment areas.
Large banks, as well as wholesale and limited-purpose banks, would also be evaluated under a separate community development test that would evaluate a bank's record of providing community development loans, qualified investments, and services.
Using bank and other publicly available data, we would be able to provide a bank with a dashboard indicating how its retail lending activity compares to thresholds for presumptive satisfactory performance that reflect the activity of other lenders and credit demand in the local area.
Separate metrics reflecting a bank's assessment area can be provided related to the evaluation of its community development performance.
Dividing evaluations into separate retail and community development tests is important.
First, evaluating all retail banks under a stand-alone retail test is important to stay true to the CRA's core focus on providing credit in underserved communities in an assessment area.
In contrast, an approach that combines all activity together runs the risk of encouraging some institutions to meet expectations primarily through a few large community development loans or investments rather than meeting local needs.
Second, having separate tests ensures that expectations are tailored for banks of different sizes and business models.
Only larger banks would be expected to meet the community development test along with the full retail test.
Similar to today, smaller banks would have the option of having their retail banking services and community development activities evaluated in order to achieve an "Outstanding" rating, but it would not be required.
Moreover, small banks below some threshold might have the option to be evaluated under the existing methodology.
Third, separate retail and community development tests provide greater scope to calibrate the evaluation metrics to the opportunities available in the market, which can differ for retail lending and community development financing.
After analyzing ways to use metrics across the board, we concluded that the value of retail services and community development services to a local community do not lend themselves easily to a monetary value metric comparable to the monetary value of loans and investments.
The value of these services may vary greatly from community to community.
It is difficult to monetize this value in a consistent way relative to the value of lending and investment, thus introducing the risk of skewing incentives inadvertently.
For example, the services and leadership provided by a small bank located in a rural community may be vital to the success of that community, even if the dollar value of those services is small compared with a branch in a large city.
Because of this concern, we are inclined to propose a set of qualitative standards to evaluate retail services within the retail test, and a separate set of qualitative standards to assess community development services within the community development test.
The core of the retail lending test would be to use widely available data to assess two clear objectives: how well a bank is serving LMI borrowers, small businesses, and small farms in its assessment area, and how well a bank is serving LMI neighborhoods in its assessment area.
The metrics used to evaluate these two questions would rely on loan counts rather than dollar value in order to avoid inadvertent biases in favor of fewer, higher-dollar value loans.9 The metrics would be evaluated separately for each major product line in a bank's assessment area, which is important to tailor the use of metrics to a bank's business model.
The proposed approach measures a bank's performance in serving the needs of both low- and moderate-income borrowers (and small businesses and small farms) and LMI places in the community.
A bank that meets or exceeds both the LMI borrower and LMI neighborhood thresholds for each of its major product lines would be presumed to have a satisfactory-or-better level of retail lending performance in that assessment area.
Using a customized dashboard, each bank could track its own activity against the threshold on an ongoing basis reflecting recent data, eliminating the lengthy uncertainty associated with the current evaluation methodology, which many banks have highlighted as the most important area for reform (figure 2).
Importantly, the CRA database we have constructed confirms that the proposed retail lending metrics correlate well with past ratings of bank performance (figure 3).
This tailoring is not possible with a uniform benchmark that applies to all banks and all communities.
We believe this tailored approach is empirically sound and avoids imposing arbitrary CRA performance measures on a bank and its community.
In order to ensure it meets standards of safety and soundness, CRA lending must be evaluated in the context of the characteristics of the bank and its community.
Additionally, the proposed retail lending metric would automatically adjust to changes in the business cycle.
Industry commenters also expressed concern that discretionary adjustments to the uniform metric are likely to lag behind the economic cycle and undermine the certainty a metric purports to provide.
By contrast, the proposed retail lending metrics are calibrated to contemporaneous changes in market conditions, thereby reducing the risk of providing unsound incentives (figure 5).
Finally, the proposed approach would continue to recognize local context in assessing a bank's CRA performance.
If a bank receives the presumption of satisfactory by meeting or exceeding the thresholds, an examiner could consider performance context information, including the bank's responsiveness to the community's needs, in determining whether the bank's performance is outstanding at the assessment area level.
Likewise, if a bank does not meet or exceed the thresholds, it would undergo a full examination, as it would currently, and could receive any level of rating, including possibly Outstanding, based on the full range of performance context considerations and clear qualitative criteria.
Retail services can be extremely important to LMI communities, although they do not easily lend themselves to consistent, comparable metrics.
It makes sense to use qualitative criteria related to the responsiveness of a bank's products and services and its delivery systems, which stakeholders highlighted as being particularly important in LMI areas.
In terms of delivery systems, we recognize the unique and important role that branches play in providing essential financial services to customers, particularly in underserved areas.
Banks would be evaluated on their branch and ATM locations and how well they serve customers using online and mobile access channels.
Providing a meaningful evaluation of all customer access channels is essential to ensuring that the CRA remains relevant as more banks adopt digital technology.
Recognizing that branches are important community assets, the proposed retail service test would compare a bank's distribution of branches, including any openings or closures, to broader patterns of activity in the region.
A recent report on branch access in rural areas found that just over 40 percent of rural counties lost bank branches between 2012 and 2017, with 39 rural communities being "deeply affected" by the loss of more than half of their bank branches.10 In addition to the challenges associated with higher cost and less convenient access to banking services, community leaders described how branch closures diminished their access to important leadership from branch personnel that was important to their community's success.
Next, let's turn to the community development test for large retail banks, as well as wholesale and limited-purpose banks.
The establishment of a separate community development test reflects stakeholder feedback emphasizing that the value of community development finance is distinct and not directly comparable to retail activity.
A separate test also allows for a broader area to be taken into account for purposes of community development relative to retail lending.
Our analysis suggests there are a set of metrics that can be compared to appropriately tailored benchmarks to provide greater certainty regarding community development lending and investment.
The proposed metric would aggregate loan and investment dollars that are originated or purchased during the evaluation period with the book value of all other community development loans and investments that are held on the bank's balance sheet (figure 6).
Reflecting input from banks and community organizations that patient, committed funding has the greatest effect, this approach avoids the incentives under current practice to provide financing in the form of short-term renewable loans in order to receive CRA credit.11
The proposed test would compare the combined measure of a bank's community development financing relative to deposits in its local assessment area to a national average, set differently for rural and urban areas, and a local average in the bank's assessment area.
The use of a national rural/metro comparator in addition to an assessment area comparator is intended to avoid skewing incentives toward financially dense areas that are already hotly competitive and to reflect the value of community development in underserved areas.
The use of these comparators would help provide consistency across evaluations and clarity regarding community development expectations for both banks and communities.
It is also important to recognize that community development financing is often provided in areas that do not neatly fit within a bank's assessment area.
Community development financing opportunities are not always easy for banks to identify and often depend on working with local nonprofits or governments to help identify projects and put together the complex financing required to bring them to fruition.
Stakeholder feedback emphasized banks' unique advantages in evaluating community development projects in the states and territories where they operate and providing the smaller-scale, more complex, and often more impactful, investments overlooked by institutional investors.
For this reason, and to encourage more activity in underserved areas, it makes sense to give consideration to all of a bank's community development activities in a state or territory where it has an assessment area.12
Banks want to know in advance that they will get the benefit of CRA consideration in order to invest the time and effort necessary to evaluate and structure community development loans and investments.
For that reason, we are sympathetic to requests for a timely process by which banks can seek conditional examiner review of particular activities before making financial commitments, particularly for activities that revitalize and stabilize targeted areas.
Our analysis suggests a community development finance metric along the lines outlined here will help to ensure greater predictability and consistency in achieving a Satisfactory rating.
However, we also want to make sure that these metrics are supplemented with clear, qualitative standards to ensure that small-scale, high-impact community development activities are rewarded, along with a bank's responsiveness to local needs and priorities.
It is also important to evaluate services qualitatively at the assessment-area level as part of the overall community development test.
Volunteer and other services provided by banks can provide meaningful support to communities whose value is unlikely to be adequately captured on a comparable basis using aggregative dollar value metrics.
In areas with a low density of financial services, a bank officer on the board of local community organizations could provide considerable value to the community that is not accurately reflected by monetizing volunteer hours based on their compensation.
This approach to assessing CRA performance would tailor performance metrics to bank size and business strategy, as well as to local and cyclical conditions.
The approach would tailor to banks' business models by establishing separate thresholds for substantially different lending products, such as mortgage loans and small business, small farm, and consumer loans, as well as separate retail lending and community development financing metrics.
The proposed metrics would also be tailored for different bank sizes.
This is facilitated in part by allowing very small banks to retain the current evaluation procedures and in part by creating a separate community development test that would apply only to large banks.
Tailoring is also an important consideration in data collection and reporting requirements.
The proposed retail lending approach is designed so that it can be implemented in significant part with data that are readily available.
In designing the community development approach, we have been mindful of burden as we consider any additional data that might be required to implement certain metrics.
The proposed threshold for each type of activity is calibrated to local conditions as they evolve over the cycle, and the community development finance metric uses an additional time-varying national rural or urban comparator.
Staff across the Federal Reserve System have devoted substantial time and effort to engaging with the other banking agencies in the CRA reform process.
We were hopeful our proposed approach could be incorporated into the proposed rulemaking that was released last month in order to seek public comment on a range of options.
Based on the best available data, we concluded that CRA metrics tailored to local conditions and the different sizes and business models of banks would best serve the credit needs of the communities that are at the heart of the statute.
This tailored approach using targeted metrics also yielded more consistent and predictable overall ratings than any comprehensive uniform metric.
Moreover, we want to be attentive to possible unintended consequences: Because a uniform comprehensive ratio would not reflect local conditions, which can vary greatly between communities and over the cycle, a bank could exert the same amount of effort in different areas or different points in the economic cycle with very different outcomes.
We continue to believe that a strong common set of interagency standards is the best outcome.
The process of sharing the data and analysis informing regulatory proposals and seeking public feedback on them is critical to the regulatory process.
Given that reforms to the CRA regulations are likely to set expectations for a few decades, it is more important to get the reforms done right than to do them quickly.
I will conclude by noting that the high level of engagement and commitment on the part of banks, community organizations, and other important stakeholders give me confidence that we will succeed in strengthening the CRA's core purpose of helping banks affirmatively meet the credit needs of their local LMI communities.
I want to express my appreciation to Carrie Johnson and Theresa Stark for assistance in preparing this text and to Theresa Stark for her dedication to strengthening the CRA throughout her service at the Federal Reserve Board.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board.
See "Mapping Inequality: Redlining in New Deal America" (2016), for a compilation of the maps and notes created by the federal Home Owners' Loan Corporation in the 1930s that designated areas considered too risky for mortgage lending and were used to determine eligibility for Federal Housing Administration guarantees.
Lael Brainard, "Community Development in Baltimore and A Few Observations on Community Reinvestment Act Modernization," (remarks delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Baltimore Community Development Gathering, Baltimore, Maryland, April 17, 2018).
In 2017, the agencies published additional findings on the CRA as part of the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council 2017 Joint Report to Congress, Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act Review, March 2017.
In 2018, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency published an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) asking for comments on a ratio-based approach to rating performance.
The Federal Reserve reviewed the more than 1,500 comments on the ANPR and subsequently held about 30 outreach meetings with representatives of banks and community organizations, and the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia hosted a research symposium.
Lael Brainard, "Community Investment in Denver," (remarks delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Denver Branch, Denver, Colorado, October 15, 2018).
Lael Brainard, "Strengthening the Community Reinvestment Act: What Are We Learning?" (remarks delivered at the Research Symposium on the Community Reinvestment Act hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, February 1, 2019).
Lael Brainard,"Keeping Community at the Heart of the Community Reinvestment Act," (remarks delivered at the Association of Neighborhood and Housing Development Eighth Annual Community Development Conference Build.Community.Power, New York, New York, May 18, 2018).
The importance of constructing a consistent and comparable CRA database was a key theme at the Research Symposium on the Community Reinvestment Act hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia on February 1, 2019.
In order for the retail lending metrics to provide a meaningful evaluation, a bank would also need to meet a minimum percentage of retail loans in its local community relative to its deposits.
The bank's ratio would be compared to a minimum activity threshold based on the performance of all reporting banks in that same assessment area, with the goal of screening out the lowest performers who would need to undergo a full review from an examiner.
The minimum activity threshold would be calibrated for geographies and different market conditions over time.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Perspectives from Main Street: Bank Branch Access in Rural Communities," (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, November 2019).
Lael Brainard, "The Community Reinvestment Act: How Can We Preserve What Works and Make it Better?," remarks delivered at the 2019 Just Economy Conference, National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, D.C., March 12, 2019.
Statewide activity outside of a bank's local assessment area would factor into its statewide community development rating, and regional activities would be considered at the institution level.


On the Monetary Policy, Technology, and Globalisation Panel at "Monetary Policy: The Challenges Ahead," an ECB Colloquium Held in Honour of Benoît Coeuré, Frankfurt, Germany
I am honored to be here today to celebrate Benoît Coeuré's tenure at the European Central Bank (ECB).
I have been working with Benoît now for a decade—starting at our respective Treasuries where we both were drafted as financial firefighters, migrating to our respective central banks to help with stabilization, recovery, and normalization, and most recently preparing for the challenges that lie ahead.
Indeed, Benoît's tenure at the ECB coincided with an incredible turnaround in unemployment and output growth.
Both the euro area and the global economy have benefited greatly from Benoît Coeuré's outstanding public service.
When Benoît was appointed chair of the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI), the global standard setter for payment issues, he doubled its output*, resulting in 75 reports.2 He turned its focus to distributed ledger, stablecoins, and central bank digital currencies long before many other central bankers realized these issues would be transforming their worlds.
Indeed, the number of Google searches for "central bank digital currencies" increased sharply over the course of Benoît's tenure as chair of the CPMI.
I was asked to provide some brief thoughts about digital developments in the world of monetary policy and central banking.
At the start of Benoît's ECB term, bitcoin's market capitalization was small, and only a handful of cryptocurrencies existed.
In the eight years since then, bitcoin's market capitalization has grown rapidly and now exceeds 100 billion euros, and thousands of cryptocurrencies have been created.3
The potential of "global stablecoins" to scale rapidly is evident from the increasingly fast rates of technology adoption and the growth of large networks.
In contrast, the internet achieved the same level of adoption in only 13 years.
More recently, smartphones and social media have achieved the same level of U.S.
Digital currency payments projects from big technology firms that have network advantages have the potential to scale even more rapidly.
Because the utility of any medium of exchange increases with the size of the network using it, the power of a stablecoin payment system depends on the breadth of its adoption.
With nearly one-third of the global population as active users on Facebook, the Libra stablecoin project stands out for the speed with which its network could reach global scale in payments.
Stablecoin networks at global scale are leading us to revisit questions over what form money can take, who or what can issue it, and how payments can be recorded and settled.
While central bank money and commercial bank money are the foundations of the modern financial system, nonbank private "money" or assets also facilitate transactions among a network of users.
Stablecoins aspire to achieve the functions of traditional money without relying on confidence in an issuer—such as a central bank—to stand behind the "money." For some potential stablecoins, a close assessment suggests users may have no rights with respect to the underlying assets or any issuer.
We have already seen the growth of massive payments networks on existing digital platforms, such as Alibaba and WeChat.
So far, these networks operate within a jurisdiction based on the sovereign currency as the unit of account, and balances are transferable in and out of bank or credit card accounts.
What would set Facebook's Libra apart, if it were to proceed, is the combination of an active-user network representing more than a third of the global population with the issuance of a private digital currency opaquely tied to a basket of sovereign currencies.8
Libra, like any stablecoin project with global scale and scope, must address a core set of legal and regulatory challenges.
A significant concern regarding Facebook's Libra project is the potential for a payment system to be adopted globally in a short time period and to establish itself as a potentially new unit of account.
Unlike social media platforms or ridesharing applications, payment systems cannot be designed as they develop, due to the nexus with consumers' financial security.
This is why in many jurisdictions, including the European Union, there is a regime to oversee retail payment systems.
Without requisite safeguards, stablecoin networks at global scale may put consumers at risk.
By contrast, over many decades, consumers in the United States and euro area have come to expect strong safeguards on their bank accounts and the associated payments.
Statutory and regulatory protections on bank accounts in the United States mean that consumers can reasonably expect their deposits to be insured up to a limit; many fraudulent transactions to be the liability of the bank; transfers to be available within specified periods; and clear, standardized disclosures about account fees and interest payments.
Not only is it not clear whether comparable protections will be in place with Libra, or what recourse consumers will have, but it is not even clear how much price risk consumers will face since they do not appear to have rights to the stablecoin's underlying assets.
This could be exacerbated by the lack of clarity about the management of reserves and the rights and responsibilities of various market participants in the network.
The risks and spillovers could be amplified by potential ambiguity surrounding the ability of official authorities to provide oversight, backstop liquidity, and collaborate across borders.
The effect of a stablecoin on financial stability, for example, would be driven in part by how the stablecoin is tied to an asset (if at all) and the features of the asset itself.
A stablecoin that is built on a permissioned network would have different risk implications than a permissionless network, which may be more vulnerable to money laundering and terrorist financing risks.
A stablecoin used solely by commercial banks would have a different risk profile than one for consumer use.
For smaller economies, there may be material effects on monetary policy from private sector digital currencies as well as foreign central bank digital currencies.
The emergence of cryptocurrencies—and particularly stablecoins—has raised important questions for central banks and other authorities, including on the appropriate regulatory framework.
In the United States, the regulatory framework for cryptocurrencies is not straightforward.
Our current framework is based largely on whether a cryptocurrency is deemed to be a security or has associated derivative financial products and whether the participating institutions have a supervisory agency overseeing their activities.
Unlike many other jurisdictions, regulators do not have plenary authority over retail payments in the United States.
Moreover, the regulatory challenges are likely to be inherently cross-border in nature.
Because stablecoins and other cryptocurrencies are unlikely to be bound by physical borders, regulatory actions in one jurisdiction are unlikely to be fully effective without coordinated action elsewhere.
The prospect of global stablecoin payment systems has intensified the interest in central bank digital currencies.
Central bank digital currency typically refers to a new type of central bank liability that could be held directly by households and businesses without the involvement of a commercial bank intermediary.12 Proponents argue that central bank digital currencies would be a safer alternative to privately issued stablecoins because they would be a direct liability of the central bank.
In the United States, there are important advantages associated with current arrangements.
dollar continues to rise due to robust demand, and the dollar plays an important role as a reserve currency globally.
Moreover, we have a robust and diverse banking system that provides important services along with a widely available and expanding variety of digital payment options that build on the existing institutional framework with its important safeguards.
Circumstances where the central bank issues digital currency directly to consumer accounts for general-purpose use would raise profound legal, policy, and operational questions.
That said, it is important to study whether we can do more to provide safer, less expensive, faster, or otherwise more efficient payments.
At the Federal Reserve, we look forward to collaborating with other jurisdictions as we continue to analyze the potential benefits and costs of central bank digital currencies.
Most immediately, the Federal Reserve is actively working to introduce a faster payment system for the United States, to improve the speed and lower the cost of consumer payments.
This summer, the Federal Reserve announced the first new payment service in more than 40 years—the FedNow Service—to provide a platform for consumers and businesses to send and receive payments immediately and securely 24 hours a day, 365 days a year.
As the public and private sectors work to reduce payment frictions, one of the most important use cases is for cross-border payments, such as remittances.
Authorities in many jurisdictions, including the United States, recognize the importance of cooperating across borders with each other and the private sector to address these cross-border frictions.13
Technology will continue driving rapid change in the way we make payments and the concept of "money." As central bankers, we recognize the power of technology and innovation to transform the financial system and reduce frictions and delays, and the importance of preserving consumer protections, data privacy and security, financial stability, and monetary policy transmission and guarding against illicit activity and cyber risks.
Given the stakes, any global payments network should be expected to meet a high threshold of legal and regulatory safeguards before launching operations.
The work ahead is not easy—the policy issues are complex, the coordination challenges are significant, and there are likely to be few simple fixes.
Because the road ahead is complicated and challenging, I am especially pleased that Benoît will continue to help us navigate these issues as the new Head of the Bank for International Settlements' Innovation Hub.
I am grateful to Paul Wong, David Mills, Theresa Dinh, and Lacy Douglas of the Federal Reserve Board for assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
The Federal Reserve and other central banks currently provide money digitally in the form of central bank deposits in traditional reserve or settlement accounts.
Similarly, the introduction of a central bank digital currency in one country could affect other jurisdictions.
In Figure 8, the United Payments Interface numbers were revised.


Federal Reserve Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications: Some Preliminary Views
It is an honor to join the 45 outstanding economic researchers and practitioners who are past recipients of the William F.
I will offer my preliminary views on the Federal Reserve's review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications after first touching briefly on the economic outlook.
There are good reasons to expect the economy to grow at a pace modestly above potential over the next year or so, supported by strong consumers and a healthy job market, despite persistent uncertainty about trade conflict and disappointing foreign growth.
Consumer sentiment remains solid, and the employment picture is positive.
Housing seems to have turned a corner and is poised for growth following several weak quarters.
Business investment remains downbeat, restrained by weak growth abroad and trade conflict.
The employment-to-population ratio for prime-age adults has moved up to its pre-recession peak, and the three-month moving average of the unemployment rate is near a 50-year low.2 Monthly job gains remain above the pace needed to absorb new entrants into the labor force despite some slowing since last year.
And initial claims for unemployment insurance—a useful real-time indicator historically—remain very low despite some modest increases.
Data on inflation have come in about as I expected, on balance, in recent months.
Inflation remains below the Federal Reserve's 2 percent symmetric objective, which has been true for most of the past seven years.
The price index for core personal consumption expenditures (PCE), which excludes food and energy prices and is a better indicator of future inflation than overall PCE prices, increased 1.7 percent over the 12 months through September.
While there are signs that the decline in euro-area manufacturing is stabilizing, the latest indicators on economic activity in China remain sluggish, and the news in Japan and in many emerging markets has been disappointing.
Overall, it appears third-quarter foreign growth was weak, and the latest indicators point to little improvement in the fourth quarter.
More broadly, the balance of risks remains to the downside, although there has been some improvement in risk sentiment in recent weeks.
The risk of a disorderly Brexit in the near future has declined significantly, and there is some hope that a U.S.–China trade truce could avert additional tariffs.
While risks remain, financial market indicators suggest market participants see a diminution in such risks, and probabilities of recessions from models using market data have declined.
The baseline is for continued moderate expansion, a strong labor market, and inflation moving gradually to our symmetric 2 percent objective.
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has taken significant action to provide insurance against the risks associated with trade conflict and weak foreign growth against a backdrop of muted inflation.
Since July, the Committee has lowered the target range for the federal funds rate by 3/4 percentage point, to the current range of 1-1/2 to 1‑3/4 percent.
It will take some time for the full effect of this accommodation to work its way through economic activity, the labor market, and inflation.
The Federal Reserve is conducting a review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications to make sure we are well positioned to advance our statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability.3 Three key features of today's new normal call for a reassessment of our monetary policy strategy: the neutral rate is very low here and abroad, trend inflation is running below target, and the sensitivity of price inflation to resource utilization is very low.4
First, trend inflation is below target.5 Underlying trend inflation appears to be running a few tenths below the Committee's symmetric 2 percent objective, according to various statistical filters.
This raises the risk that households and businesses could come to expect inflation to run persistently below our target and change their behavior in a way that reinforces that expectation.
Indeed, with inflation having fallen short of 2 percent for most of the past seven years, inflation expectations may have declined, as suggested by some survey-based measures of long-run inflation expectations and by market-based measures of inflation compensation.
Second, the sensitivity of price inflation to resource utilization is very low.
A flat Phillips curve has the important advantage of allowing employment to continue expanding for longer without generating inflationary pressures, thereby providing greater opportunities to more people.
But it also makes it harder to achieve our 2 percent inflation objective on a sustained basis when inflation expectations have drifted below 2 percent.
Third, the long-run neutral rate of interest is very low, which means that we are likely to see more frequent and prolonged episodes when the federal funds rate is stuck at its effective lower bound (ELB).6 The neutral rate is the level of the federal funds rate that would keep the economy at full employment and 2 percent inflation if no tailwinds or headwinds were buffeting the economy.
A variety of forces have likely contributed to a decline in the neutral rate, including demographic trends in many large economies, some slowing in the rate of productivity growth, and increases in the demand for safe assets.
When looking at the Federal Reserve's Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), it is striking that the Committee's median projection of the longer-run federal funds rate has moved down from 4-1/4 percent to 2-1/2 percent over the past seven years.7 A similar decline can be seen among private forecasts.8 This decline means the conventional policy buffer is likely to be only about half of the 4-1/2 to 5 percentage points by which the FOMC has typically cut the federal funds rate to counter recessionary pressures over the past five decades.
This large loss of policy space will tend to increase the frequency or length of periods when the policy rate is pinned at the ELB, unemployment is elevated, and inflation is below target.9 In turn, the experience of frequent or extended periods of low inflation at the ELB risks eroding inflation expectations and further compressing the conventional policy space.
The risk is a downward spiral where conventional policy space gets compressed even further, the ELB binds even more frequently, and it becomes increasingly difficult to move inflation expectations and inflation back up to target.
While consumers and businesses might see very low inflation as having benefits at the individual level, at the aggregate level, inflation that is too low can make it very challenging for monetary policy to cut the short-term nominal interest rate sufficiently to cushion the economy effectively.10
The experience of Japan and of the euro area more recently suggests that this risk is real.
Indeed, the fact that Japan and the euro area are struggling with this challenging triad further complicates our task, because there are important potential spillovers from monetary policy in other major economies to our own economy through exchange rate and yield curve channels.11
In light of the likelihood of more frequent episodes at the ELB, our monetary policy review should advance two goals.
First, monetary policy should achieve average inflation outcomes of 2 percent over time to re-anchor inflation expectations at our target.
Second, we need to expand policy space to buffer the economy from adverse developments at the ELB.
The apparent slippage in trend inflation below our target calls for some adjustments to our monetary policy strategy and communications.
In this context and as part of our review, my colleagues and I have been discussing how to better anchor inflation expectations firmly at our objective.
In particular, it may be helpful to specify that policy aims to achieve inflation outcomes that average 2 percent over time or over the cycle.
Given the persistent shortfall of inflation from its target over recent years, this would imply supporting inflation a bit above 2 percent for some time to compensate for the period of underperformance.
One class of strategies that has been proposed to address this issue are formal "makeup" rules that seek to compensate for past inflation deviations from target.
For instance, under price-level targeting, policy seeks to stabilize the price level around a constant growth path that is consistent with the inflation objective.12 Under average inflation targeting, policy seeks to return the average of inflation to the target over some specified period.13
To be successful, formal makeup strategies require that financial market participants, households, and businesses understand in advance and believe, to some degree, that policy will compensate for past misses.
I suspect policymakers would find communications to be quite challenging with rigid forms of makeup strategies, because of what have been called time-inconsistency problems.
For example, if inflation has been running well below—or above—target for a sustained period, when the time arrives to maintain inflation commensurately above—or below—2 percent for the same amount of time, economic conditions will typically be inconsistent with implementing the promised action.
Analysis also suggests it could take many years with a formal average inflation targeting framework to return inflation to target following an ELB episode, although this depends on difficult-to-assess modeling assumptions and the particulars of the strategy.14
Thus, while formal average inflation targeting rules have some attractive properties in theory, they could be challenging to implement in practice.
I prefer a more flexible approach that would anchor inflation expectations at 2 percent by achieving inflation outcomes that average 2 percent over time or over the cycle.
For instance, following five years when the public has observed inflation outcomes in the range of 1-1/2 to 2 percent, to avoid a decline in expectations, the Committee would target inflation outcomes in a range of, say, 2 to 2-1/2 percent for the subsequent five years to achieve inflation outcomes of 2 percent on average overall.
Flexible inflation averaging could bring some of the benefits of a formal average inflation targeting rule, but it would be simpler to communicate.
By committing to achieve inflation outcomes that average 2 percent over time, the Committee would make clear in advance that it would accommodate rather than offset modest upward pressures to inflation in what could be described as a process of opportunistic reflation.15
Second, the Committee is examining what monetary policy tools are likely to be effective in providing accommodation when the federal funds rate is at the ELB.16 In my view, the review should make clear that the Committee will actively employ its full toolkit so that the ELB is not an impediment to providing accommodation in the face of significant economic disruptions.
The importance and challenge of providing accommodation when the policy rate reaches the ELB should not be understated.
In my own experience on the international response to the financial crisis, I was struck that the ELB proved to be a severe impediment to the provision of policy accommodation initially.
Once conventional policy reached the ELB, the long delays necessitated for policymakers in nearly every jurisdiction to develop consensus and take action on unconventional policy sapped confidence, tightened financial conditions, and weakened recovery.
Economic conditions in the euro area and elsewhere suffered for longer than necessary in part because of the lengthy process of building agreement to act decisively with a broader set of tools.
Despite delays and uncertainties, the balance of evidence suggests forward guidance and balance sheet policies were effective in easing financial conditions and providing accommodation following the global financial crisis.17 Accordingly, these tools should remain part of the Committee's toolkit.
However, the quantitative asset purchase policies that were used following the crisis proved to be lumpy both to initiate at the ELB and to calibrate over the course of the recovery.
To the extent that the public is uncertain about the conditions that might trigger asset purchases and how long the purchases would be sustained, it undercuts the efficacy of the policy.
Similarly, significant frictions associated with the normalization process can arise as the end of the asset purchase program approaches.
For these reasons, I have been interested in exploring approaches that expand the space for targeting interest rates in a more continuous fashion as an extension of our conventional policy space and in a way that reinforces forward guidance on the policy rate.18 In particular, there may be advantages to an approach that caps interest rates on Treasury securities at the short-to-medium range of the maturity spectrum—yield curve caps—in tandem with forward guidance that conditions liftoff from the ELB on employment and inflation outcomes.
To be specific, once the policy rate declines to the ELB, this approach would smoothly move to capping interest rates on the short-to-medium segment of the yield curve.
The yield curve ceilings would transmit additional accommodation through the longer rates that are relevant for households and businesses in a manner that is more continuous than quantitative asset purchases.
Moreover, if the horizon on the interest rate caps is set so as to reinforce forward guidance on the policy rate, doing so would augment the credibility of the yield curve caps and thereby diminish concerns about an open-ended balance sheet commitment.
In addition, once the targeted outcome is achieved, and the caps expire, any securities that were acquired under the program would roll off organically, unwinding the policy smoothly and predictably.
Forward guidance on the policy rate will also be important in providing accommodation at the ELB.
As we saw in the United States at the end of 2015 and again toward the second half of 2016, there tends to be strong pressure to "normalize" or lift off from the ELB preemptively based on historical relationships between inflation and employment.
Indeed, recent research suggests that forward guidance that commits to delay the liftoff from the ELB until full employment and 2 percent inflation have been achieved on a sustained basis—say over the course of a year—could improve performance on our dual-mandate goals.19
To reinforce this commitment, the forward guidance on the policy rate could be implemented in tandem with yield curve caps.
For example, as the federal funds rate approaches the ELB, the Committee could commit to refrain from lifting off the ELB until full employment and 2 percent inflation are sustained for a year.
If the outlook shifts materially, the Committee could reassess how long it will take to get inflation back to 2 percent and adjust policy accordingly.
One benefit of this approach is that the forward guidance and the yield curve ceilings would reinforce each other.
The combination of a commitment to condition liftoff on the sustained achievement of our employment and inflation objectives with yield curve caps targeted at the same horizon has the potential to work well in many circumstances.
For very severe recessions, such as the financial crisis, such an approach could be augmented with purchases of 10-year Treasury securities to provide further accommodation at the long end of the yield curve.
Presumably, the requisite scale of such purchases—when combined with medium-term yield curve ceilings and forward guidance on the policy rate—would be relatively smaller than if the longer-term asset purchases were used alone.
Before closing, it is important to recall another important lesson of the financial crisis: The stability of the financial system is important to the achievement of the statutory goals of full employment and 2 percent inflation.
In that regard, the changes in the macroeconomic environment that underlie our monetary policy review may have some implications for financial stability.
Historically, when the Phillips curve was steeper, inflation tended to rise as the economy heated up, which prompted the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates.
In turn, the interest rate increases would have the effect of tightening financial conditions more broadly.
With a flat Phillips curve, inflation does not rise as much as resource utilization tightens, and interest rates are less likely to rise to restrictive levels.
The resulting lower-for-longer interest rates, along with sustained high rates of resource utilization, are conducive to increasing risk appetite, which could prompt reach-for-yield behavior and incentives to take on additional debt, leading to financial imbalances as an expansion extends.
To the extent that the combination of a low neutral rate, a flat Phillips curve, and low underlying inflation may lead financial stability risks to become more tightly linked to the business cycle, it would be preferable to use tools other than tightening monetary policy to temper the financial cycle.
In particular, active use of macroprudential tools such as the countercyclical buffer is vital to enable monetary policy to stay focused on achieving maximum employment and average inflation of 2 percent on a sustained basis.
The Federal Reserve's commitment to adapt our monetary policy strategy to changing circumstances has enabled us to support the U.S.
economy throughout the expansion, which is now in its 11th year.
In light of the decline in the neutral rate, low trend inflation, and low sensitivity of inflation to slack as well as the consequent greater frequency of the policy rate being at the effective lower bound, this is an important time to review our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications in order to improve the achievement of our statutory goals.
I have offered some preliminary thoughts on how we could bolster inflation expectations by achieving inflation outcomes of 2 percent on average over time and, when policy is constrained by the ELB, how we could combine forward guidance on the policy rate with caps on the short-to-medium segment of the yield curve to buffer the economy against adverse developments.
I am grateful to Ivan Vidangos of the Federal Reserve Board for assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Claudia Sahm shows that a 1/2 percentage point increase in the three-month moving average of the unemployment rate relative to the previous year's low is a good real-time recession indicator.
See Claudia Sahm (2019), "Direct Stimulus Payments to Individuals (PDF)," Policy Proposal, The Hamilton Project at the Brookings Institution (Washington: THP, May 16).
Information about the review of monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications.htm.
Clarida (2019), "The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices," speech delivered at the 2019 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, February 22; and Jerome H.
Powell (2019), "Monetary Policy: Normalization and the Road Ahead," speech delivered at the 2019 SIEPR Economic Summit, Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., March 8.
See Lael Brainard (2016), "The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, September 12.
See Lael Brainard (2017), "Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, September 5; and James H.
Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
See Lael Brainard (2015), "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1.
The projection materials for the Federal Reserve's SEP are available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomccalendars.htm.
44 (October 10); and Wolters Kluwer (2012), Blue Chip Economic Indicators, vol.
See Michael Kiley and John Roberts (2017), "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
317–72; Eric Swanson (2018), "The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October); and Hess Chung, Etienne Gagnon, Taisuke Nakata, Matthias Paustian, Bernd Schlusche, James Trevino, Diego Vilán, and Wei Zheng (2019), "Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January).
The important observation that some consumers and businesses see low inflation as having benefits emerged from listening to a diverse range of perspectives, including representatives of consumer, labor, business, community, and other groups during the Fed Listens events; for details, see https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/review-of-monetary-policy-strategy-tools-and-communications-fed-listens-events.htm.
See Lael Brainard (2017), "Cross-Border Spillovers of Balance Sheet Normalization," speech delivered at the National Bureau of Economic Research's Monetary Economics Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 13.
See, for example, James Bullard (2018), "A Primer on Price Level Targeting in the U.S.
See, for example, Lars Svensson (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve (PDF)," presented at "Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools and Communication Practices," sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, June 5.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 17–18, 2019," press release, October 9; and David Reifschneider and David Wilcox (2019), "Average Inflation Targeting Would Be a Weak Tool for the Fed to Deal with Recession and Chronic Low Inflation (PDF)," Policy Brief PB19-16 (Washington: Peterson Institute for International Economics, November).
Wright (2019), "The Federal Reserve's Current Framework for Monetary Policy: A Review and Assessment (PDF)," paper presented at "Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools and Communication Practices," sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, June 4.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 31–August 1, 2018," press release, August 1; and Board of Governors (2019), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, October 29–30, 2019," press release, October 30.
For details on purchases of securities by the Federal Reserve, see https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/timeline-balance-sheet-policies.htm.
See, for example, Simon Gilchrist and Egon Zakrajšek (2013), "The Impact of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs on Corporate Credit Risk," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
29–57; Simon Gilchrist, David López-Salido, and Egon Zakrajšek (2015), "Monetary Policy and Real Borrowing Costs at the Zero Lower Bound," American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, vol.
77–109; Jing Cynthia Wu and Fan Dora Xia (2016), "Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
253–91; and Stefania D'Amico and Iryna Kaminska (2019), "Credit Easing versus Quantitative Easing: Evidence from Corporate and Government Bond Purchase Programs," Bank of England Staff Working Paper Series 825 (London: Bank of England, September).
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), "Strategies for Targeting Interest Rates Out the Yield Curve," memorandum to the Federal Open Market Committee, October 13, available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomc-memos.htm#m2010; and Ben Bernanke (2016), "What Tools Does The Fed Have Left? Part 2: Targeting Longer-Term Interest Rates," blog post, Brookings Institution, March 24.
See Ben Bernanke, Michael Kiley, and John Roberts (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System) and Chung and others, "Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound," in note 9.

Over the past year, my colleagues and I on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) have been conducting a first-ever public review of how we make monetary policy.
As part of that review, we held Fed Listens events around the country where representatives from a wide range of groups have been telling us how the economy is working for them and the people they represent and how the Federal Reserve might better promote the goals Congress has set for us: maximum employment and price stability.
First, as this expansion continues into its 11th year—the longest in U.S.
For example, more than a decade of steady advances has pushed the jobless rate near a 50-year low, where it has remained for well over a year.
Fortunately, the outlook for further progress is good: Forecasters are generally predicting continued growth, a strong job market, and inflation near 2 percent.
Tonight I will begin by discussing the Fed's policy actions over the past year to support the favorable outlook.
Then I will turn to two important opportunities for further gains from this expansion: maintaining a stable and reliable pace of 2 percent inflation and spreading the benefits of employment more widely.
For example, in the Survey of Professional Forecasters, the forecast for inflation is a bit lower, but the unemployment forecast is unchanged and the forecast for gross domestic product (GDP) is nearly unchanged.2 The key to the ongoing favorable outlook is household spending, which represents about 70 percent of the economy and continues to be strong, supported by the healthy job market, rising incomes, and solid consumer confidence.
I will describe how we grappled with incoming information and made important monetary policy changes through the year to help keep the favorable outlook on track.
As the year began, growth appeared robust, but the economy faced some risks flowing mainly from weakening global economic growth and trade developments.
Foreign growth, which slipped in the second half of last year, slid further as 2019 progressed.
While weaker foreign growth does not necessarily translate into similar weakness here, it does hurt our exporters and presents a risk that the weakness may spread more broadly.
These global developments have been holding back overall economic growth.
Manufacturing output, which had only recently surpassed its level before the Great Recession, has declined this year and is again below its pre-recession peak.
After remaining close to our symmetric 2 percent objective for much of last year, inflation is now running below 2 percent.
Some of the softness in overall inflation is the result of a fall in oil prices and should not affect inflation going forward.
The main themes of our deliberations this year have been a continuing favorable outlook founded on strength in the household sector, with a few yellow flags including muted inflation and weakness in manufacturing.
In addition, global growth and trade have presented ongoing risks and uncertainties.
Specifically, we never have a crystal clear real-time picture of how the economy is performing.
In addition, the precise timing and size of the effects of our policy decisions cannot be known in real time.
In August, the Bureau of Labor Statistics previewed a likely revision to its count of payroll job creation for the 12 months ended March 2019.
While this news did not dramatically alter our outlook, it pointed to an economy with somewhat less momentum than we had thought.3
Uncertainty about how our policies are affecting the economy also entered our discussions.
As you know, we set our policy interest rate to achieve our goals of maximum employment and stable prices.
One of these is the interest rate that would be neutral—neither restraining the economy nor pushing it upward.
A policy rate above r* would tend to restrain economic activity, while a setting below r* would tend to speed up the economy.
A second benchmark is the natural rate of unemployment, which is the lowest rate of unemployment that would not create upward pressure on inflation.
Since the end of last year, incoming data—especially muted inflation data—prompted analysts inside and outside the Fed to again revise down their estimates of r* and u*.4 Taken at face value, a lower r* would suggest that monetary policy is providing somewhat less support for employment and inflation than previously believed, and the fall in u* would suggest that the labor market was less tight than believed.5 Both could help explain the weakness in inflation.
As with the revised jobs data, these revised estimates of the stars were not a game changer for policy, but they provided another reason why a somewhat lower setting of our policy interest rate might be appropriate.
How did we add up all of these considerations? To help keep the U.S.
economy strong in the face of global developments and to provide some insurance against ongoing risks, we progressively eased the stance of monetary policy over the course of the year.
First, we signaled that increases in our short-term interest rate were unlikely.
Then, from July to October, we reduced the target range for the federal funds rate by 3/4 percentage point.
The full effects of these monetary policy actions will be felt over time, but we believe they are already helping to support consumer and business sentiment and boosting spending in interest-sensitive sectors, such as housing and consumer durable goods.
We see the current stance of monetary policy as likely to remain appropriate as long as incoming information about the economy remains broadly consistent with our outlook of moderate economic growth, a strong labor market, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective.
Looking ahead, we will be monitoring the effects of our policy actions, along with other information bearing on the outlook, as we assess the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate.
For many years as the economy recovered from the Great Recession, inflation averaged around 1.5 percent—below our 2 percent objective (figure 3).
We had long expected that inflation would gradually rise as the expansion continued, and, as I noted, both overall and core inflation ran at rates consistent with our goal for much of 2018.
But this year, inflation is again running below 2 percent.
It is reasonable to ask why inflation running somewhat below 2 percent is a big deal.
We have heard a lot about inflation at our Fed Listens events.
People are concerned about the rising cost of medical care, of housing, and of college, but nobody seems to be complaining about overall inflation running below 2 percent.
Even central bankers are not concerned about any particular minor fluctuation in inflation.
Around the world, however, we have seen that inflation running persistently below target can lead to an unhealthy dynamic in which inflation expectations drift down, pulling actual inflation further down.
Lower inflation can, in turn, pull interest rates to ever-lower levels.
The experience of Japan, and now the euro area, suggests that this dynamic is very difficult to reverse, and once under way, it can make it harder for a central bank to support its economy by further lowering interest rates.
That is why it is essential that we at the Fed use our tools to make sure that we do not permit an unhealthy downward drift in inflation expectations and inflation.
We are strongly committed to symmetrically and sustainably achieving our 2 percent inflation objective so that in making long-term plans, households and businesses can reasonably expect 2 percent inflation over time.
Employment gains have been broad based across all racial and ethnic groups and all levels of educational attainment as well as among people with disabilities (figure 4).
The strong labor market is also encouraging more people in their prime working years—ages 25 to 54—to rejoin or remain in the labor force, meaning that they either have a job or are actively looking for one.
For several decades up until the mid-1990s, the share of prime-age people in the labor force rose, as an influx of women more than offset some decline in male participation.
While the United States was roughly in the middle of the pack among 32 economies as of 1995, in 2018 we ranked near the bottom (figure 6).
Fortunately, in the strong job market since 2014, prime-age participation has been staging a comeback.
So far, we have made up more than half the loss in the Great Recession, which translates to almost 2 million more people in the labor force.
Income growth of low- and middle-income households has shown a pattern similar to that of participation, with two decades of disappointing news turning to better news during the past few years.
Since then, incomes for these groups have risen more rapidly, as wage growth has picked up—and picked up most for the lower-paying jobs (figure 7).
The Fed can play a role in this effort by steadfastly pursuing our goals of maximum employment and price stability.
The research literature suggests a variety of policies, beyond the scope of monetary policy, that could spur further progress by better preparing people to meet the challenges of technological innovation and global competition and by supporting and rewarding labor force participation.6 These policies could bring immense benefits both to the lives of workers and families directly affected and to the strength of the economy overall.
Monetary policy is now well positioned to support a strong labor market and return inflation decisively to our symmetric 2 percent objective.
If the outlook changes materially, policy will change as well.
These wealth calculations are from the Federal Reserve's Distributional Financial Accounts (DFAs).
For more details on the DFAs, see Michael Batty, Joseph Briggs, Karen Pence, Paul Smith, and Alice Volz (2019), "The Distributional Financial Accounts," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 30).
The projections of FOMC participants as reported in the Summary of Economic Projections show a similar change.
The Fed's real-time assessment of job growth this year is discussed in Jerome H.
Powell (2019), "Data-Dependent Monetary Policy in an Evolving Economy," speech delivered at "Trucks and Terabytes: Integrating the 'Old' and 'New' Economies," the 61st Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Denver, Colorado, October 8.
Taken literally, the revised estimates of the stars would, by standard rules of thumb, call for a somewhat lower federal funds rate.
For example, using the Taylor (1993) rule and using Okun's law to state the rule in terms of the unemployment gap with a coefficient of 1 instead of the output gap with a coefficient of 0.5, the shift in r* and u* would call for a 50 basis point reduction in the federal funds rate.
Taylor (1993), "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.
Francesco Grigoli, Zsóka Kóczán, and Petia Topalova (2018), "Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects (PDF)," chapter 2 in International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook (Washington: IMF, April), pp.


The Federal Reserve’s Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices
At "Fed Policy: A Shadow Review" Cato Institute’s 37th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, D.C.
I am delighted to be at the Cato Institute today to participate in your annual monetary conference.
This year's conference, "Fed Policy: A Shadow Review," takes up the Federal Reserve's 2019 review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.
Although I will have more to say about the review in a moment, let me state at the outset that we believe our existing framework, which has been in place since 2012, has served us well and has enabled us to achieve and sustain our statutorily assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability.
economy operating at or close to maximum employment and price stability, now is an especially opportune time to conduct this review.
The unemployment rate is near a 50-year low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective.
With this review, we hope to ensure that we are well positioned to continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years.
and foreign economies have changed in some important ways since the Global Financial Crisis.
Perhaps most significantly, neutral interest rates appear to have fallen in the United States.3 A fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will hit its effective lower bound (ELB) in future economic downturns.
That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to support spending and employment and to keep inflation from falling too far below the central bank's objective—2 percent in the case of the Federal Reserve.4
Another key development in recent decades is that price inflation appears less responsive to resource slack.
That is, the short-run price Phillips curve—if not the wage Phillips curve—appears to have flattened, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.5 A flatter Phillips curve permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns—as was the case during and after the Great Recession—because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when the Phillips curve is flatter.6 However, a flatter Phillips curve also increases the cost, in terms of lost economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations.
Thus, a flatter Phillips curve makes it all the more important that inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.7 Based on the evidence I have reviewed, I judge that U.S.
inflation expectations today do reside at the low end of a range I consider consistent with our price‑stability mandate.
For some time now, price stability in the United States has coincided with a historically low unemployment rate.
This low unemployment rate, 3.6 percent in October, has been interpreted by many as suggesting that the labor market is currently operating beyond full employment.
However, we cannot directly observe the level of the unemployment rate that is consistent with full employment and price stability, u*, but must infer it from data via models.
I myself believe that the range of plausible estimates of u* extends to 4 percent and below and includes the current unemployment rate of 3.6 percent.
As the unemployment rate has declined in recent years, labor force participation for people in their prime working years has increased significantly, with the October participation rate at a cycle high of 82.8 percent.8 Increased prime-age participation has provided employers with additional labor resources and has been one factor, along with a pickup in labor productivity, restraining inflationary pressures.
Whether participation will continue to increase in a tight labor market remains to be seen.
Also, although the labor market is robust, there is no evidence that rising wages are putting excessive upward pressure on price inflation.
Wages today are increasing broadly in line with productivity growth and underlying inflation.
Also of note, and receiving less attention than it deserves, is the material increase in labor's share of national income that has occurred in recent years as the labor market has tightened.
As I have written before, labor's share tends to rise as expansions endure and the labor market tightens.9 In recent cycles—and thus far in this cycle—this rise in labor's share has not put excessive upward pressure on price inflation.
The Federal Reserve Act instructs the Fed to conduct monetary policy "so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates."10 Our review this year takes this statutory mandate as given and also takes as given that inflation at a rate of 2 percent is most consistent over the longer run with the congressional mandate.
Our existing monetary policy strategy is laid out in the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.11 First adopted in January 2012, the statement indicates that the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from 2 percent and deviations of employment from assessments of its maximum level.
In doing so, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) recognizes that these assessments of maximum employment are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision.
As a practical matter, our current strategy shares many elements with the policy framework known as "flexible inflation targeting."12 However, the Fed's mandate is much more explicit about the role of employment than that of most flexible inflation-targeting central banks, and our statement reflects this by stating that when the two sides of the mandate are in conflict, neither one takes precedence over the other.
The first question is, "Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective?"
Under our current approach as well as the approaches of many central banks around the world, persistent inflation shortfalls of the target are treated as "bygones." Central banks are generally believed to have effective tools for preventing persistent inflation overshoots, but the ELB on interest rates makes persistent undershoots more of a challenge.
Persistent inflation shortfalls carry the risk that longer-term inflation expectations become anchored below the stated inflation goal.13
In part because of that concern, some economists have advocated "makeup" strategies under which policymakers seek to undo past inflation deviations from target.
These strategies include targeting average inflation and price-level targeting, in which policymakers seek to stabilize the price level around a constant growth path.14 Other makeup strategies seek to reverse shortfalls in policy accommodation at the ELB by keeping the policy rate lower for longer than otherwise would be the case.15 In many models that incorporate the ELB, these makeup strategies lead to better average performance on both legs of the dual mandate.16
The success of makeup strategies relies on households and firms believing in advance that the makeup will, in fact, be delivered when the time comes—for example, that a persistent inflation shortfall will be met by future inflation above 2 percent.
As is well known from the research literature, makeup strategies, in general, are not time consistent because when the time comes to push inflation above 2 percent, conditions at that time will not justify that action.
Thus, one of the most important questions we seek to answer in our review is whether the Fed could, in practice, attain the benefits of makeup strategies that are possible in theoretical models.
The next question the review is considering is, "Are existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded? And, if so, how?" The FOMC's primary monetary policy tool is its target range for the federal funds rate.
In December 2008, the FOMC cut that target to just above zero in response to financial turmoil and deteriorating economic conditions.
economy required additional support after the ELB was reached, the FOMC deployed two additional tools in the years following the crisis: balance sheet policies and forward guidance about the likely path of the federal funds rate.17
In addition to assessing the efficacy of these existing tools, the review is examining additional tools for easing policy when the ELB is binding.
During the crisis and its aftermath, the Federal Reserve considered some of the tools deployed by other central banks but ultimately found them wanting in the U.S.
The third question the review is considering is, "How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?" Our communication practices have evolved considerably since 1994, when the Federal Reserve released the first statement after an FOMC meeting.
Over the past decade or so, the FOMC has enhanced its communication both to promote public understanding of its policy goals, strategy, and actions and to foster democratic accountability.
These enhancements include the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy; postmeeting press conferences; various statements about the principles and strategy guiding the Committee's normalization of monetary policy following the financial crisis; and quarterly summaries of individual FOMC participants' economic projections, assessments about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, and judgments of the uncertainty and balance of risks around their projections.18
For example, there might be ways to improve communication about the coordination of policy tools or the interplay between monetary policy and financial stability.
Let me turn now to our review process itself.19 An important piece of this review has been a series of 14 Fed Listens events, hosted by the Board and the Reserve Banks from late February until mid-October.
We heard from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including business and labor leaders, community development professionals, and academics.
At a research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago in early June, we heard from prominent academic economists as well as national and community leaders.
Our Fed Listens events have provided us with a valuable perspective on the labor market that could not otherwise be gleaned from aggregate statistics; these events have also offered insights into how the monetary levers we pull and push affect communities, credit availability, and small businesses.
Last summer, the FOMC began to assess what we have learned at the Fed Listens events and to receive briefings from System staff on topics relevant to the review.20 At our July meeting, FOMC participants agreed that our current framework for monetary policy has served the Committee and the U.S.
FOMC participants noted that the Committee's experience with forward guidance and asset purchases has improved its understanding of how these tools operate.
As a result, the Committee could proceed more confidently in using these tools in the future if economic circumstances warranted.
However, overall, we judged that forward guidance and balance sheet tools, while helpful, did not eliminate the risk of returning to the ELB.
At our September meeting, we discussed makeup strategies in the context of a lower neutral policy interest rate, a reduction in conventional policy space, and a higher likelihood that future economic downturns will involve a return to the ELB.
We generally agreed that our current monetary policy framework is flexible enough to allow the Committee to choose the policy actions that best support our dual-mandate objectives in a wide variety of economic circumstances.
In particular, we have not yet begun to consider potential changes to communication practices, including the Committee's consensus Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.
The statement has helped articulate and clarify the Federal Reserve's approach to monetary policy, and we have agreed that any changes we might make to our strategy would likely call for some modification of this consensus statement.
We will continue to report on our discussions in the minutes of our meetings and share our conclusions when we finish the review, likely around the middle of next year.
The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges.
What I can say is that any refinements or more material changes to our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today.
I trust that today's conference will provide stimulating discussion of issues that are central to our review.
"Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"Pioneering Price Level Targeting: The Swedish Experience 1931–1937," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14.
"Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy," Ben Bernanke's Blog, October 12.
"Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications," (PDF) IMF Working Paper WP/5/230.
"Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 30–31, 2019," press release, August 21.
"Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?" Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.
"How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M.
Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol.
"The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy," (PDF) Occasional Paper Series 217.
"The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve," (PDF) speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19.
Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics, (PDF) report prepared for the 2017 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3.
"Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit," (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
"The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy,"(PDF) Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no.
"The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions," IMF Economic Review, vol.
"Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy," (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds., Handbook of Economic Forecasting, vol.
"Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework?" (PDF) paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13–14.
"From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting," (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
"The Risky Steady State and the Interest Rate Lower Bound," (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-009.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," Journal of International Economics, vol.
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World," (PDF) Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate," NBER Working Paper Series 19887.
"Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10.
"Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on the Nominal Interest Rate," (PDF) International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Average Inflation Targeting," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay?" (PDF) International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"A New Data Set on Monetary Policy: The Economic Forecasts of Individual Members of the FOMC," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Do Inflation-Targeting Central Banks Implicitly Target the Price Level?" (PDF) International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping?" (PDF) in World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.
"The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123.
"Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24.
"The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., January 19.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework.
They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes to its framework.
For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).
monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).
For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).
One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010).
As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions.
Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.
See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment.
Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation.
Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation.
Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s.
These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.
The box "The Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Individuals" in the Board's July 2018 Monetary Policy Report contains a discussion of recent developments in labor force participation rates for prime-age individuals; see Board of Governors (2018, pp.
Even though the act lists three distinct goals, the Federal Reserve's mandate for monetary policy is commonly known as the "dual mandate." The reason is that an economy in which people who want to work either have a job or are likely to find one fairly quickly and in which the price level (meaning a broad measure of the price of goods and services purchased by consumers) is stable creates the conditions needed for interest rates to settle at moderate levels.
Quoted text from the Federal Reserve Act is in 12 U.S.C.
These risks could be exacerbated if households and businesses expect monetary policy to be insufficiently accommodative because of proximity to the ELB.
Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) provide an early discussion of how optimal monetary policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during the subsequent economic expansion.
Nessén and Vestin (2005) discuss the relationship between average inflation targeting and price-level targeting.
There is a dearth of empirical evidence on strategies seeking to make up for inflation deviations.
Central banks that pursue an inflation goal generally seek to achieve a specific rate of inflation by some time horizon—typically a couple of years ahead or over the "medium run"—without regard to past inflation deviations.
One exception is the Reserve Bank of Australia, whose inflation goal is specified as a range of "2–3 per cent, on average, over the medium term" and thus might embed some notion of history dependence.
However, Ruge-Murcia (2014) argues that the drift in the price level in Australia is comparable with the drifts observed in economies with purely forward-looking specification of the inflation goal.
See also Kiley and Roberts (2017) for a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during economic expansions to compensate for below-target realizations of inflation during economic downturns.
See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) for a strategy in which a central bank following a Taylor rule makes up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes by subsequently keeping the policy rate lower than otherwise.
The box "Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules" in the Board's July 2018 Monetary Policy Report contains an application of such a modified rule; see Board of Governors (2018, pp.
See English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) for applications of flexible price-level targeting and nominal income-targeting strategies to a quantitative model of the U.S.
As an illustration of the shortfall in policy support created by a binding ELB during the Global Financial Crisis, the simple policy rules considered in a January 2017 speech by then-Chair Janet Yellen prescribed setting the federal funds rate between negative 1-1/2 and negative 9 percent; see Yellen (2017).
In addition to using these two additional monetary policy tools, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of other measures to stabilize the financial system, increase household and business confidence, and more generally support the economic recovery.
These supplementary measures included the setting up of several credit facilities and the introduction of stress tests for systemically important financial institutions.
Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve published a summary of individual economic projections from various Board members, FOMC members, or FOMC participants in the semiannual Monetary Policy Report.
With the introduction of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in 2007, the FOMC increased the frequency of the releases of policymaker projections, expanded the set of economic variables included, and extended the forecast horizon.
Because the SEP includes individual contributions of projections and assessments from all FOMC participants, it captures a broader range of views than those of FOMC members.

At "Supervision in a Digital Era," the 26th Annual Conference of the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, Abu Dhabi, the United Arab Emirates
You are in a region of the world that's a fitting place to discuss the future of insurance supervision because of its ties to the very origins of insurance.
The first written system of laws, the Hammurabic Code, in fact, included the first rules on loss liability.
The ancient Arab tribal practice of takaful, a system of guarantees, gave rise to one of the earliest forms of mutual insurance, which was used to protect ship owners and cargo.
And while I couldn't be part of the your discussions, I am grateful for this opportunity to reach you with a message about how the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS) is supporting the Financial Stability Board's (FSB) goal of promoting a strong and stable global financial system.
The FSB was created to gather national and regional authorities together in a forum that considers and addresses financial stability risks.
The new global financial architecture built in the aftermath of the crisis requires continued cooperation among authorities, standard-setting bodies, and all stakeholders.
Since becoming Chair of the FSB last December, I have had some time to observe the important work of the IAIS as one of the standard-setting bodies that are essential to the FSB.
It's also a valuable part of the work of the FSB Standing Committees on Supervision and Regulatory Cooperation and Standards Implementation.
Our two organizations have worked together closely on addressing systemic risk related to insurance.
In particular, I appreciate the work of the IAIS to develop a Holistic Framework for the assessment and mitigation of systemic risk in the insurance sector.
As we think back to 1994, and the step forward the IAIS represented for cooperation and coordination on insurance oversight, I think we can all marvel at how modest, relative to today, were the demands and the aspirations at that time for international standard-setting.
On the one hand, insurance had been a global business for well over a century.
On the other, the idea that an insurance company could be at the center of a global financial meltdown would have seem far-fetched.
Likewise, even after the financial crises in developing countries in the late 1990s, few people believed that the world's largest and wealthiest economies could all be threatened with ruin by a truly global crisis.
It is for this reason that we are not this year also celebrating the twentieth anniversary of the Financial Stability Forum, which was created in that more innocent era.
It was replaced by the FSB a decade ago because of the urgent need for a larger and more ambitious organization to deal with the global crisis that few had seen coming.1
That global financial crisis demanded a global response and the Group of 20 (G20) leaders called on national authorities to cast a wider net for membership than the Financial Stability Forum could offer.
The first ten years of the FSB have seen important achievements in promoting global financial standards that have addressed weaknesses revealed by the financial crisis.
Today, banks are more resilient due to higher capital and liquidity standards.
But the FSB's policy work needs to advance in a few important areas.
While resolution plans are in place for the global, systemically important banks, more work is needed to build effective resolution regimes for insurers.
Your conference theme this year, "Supervision in a Digital Era" is timely, and the panels you have planned on these topics can inform the supervisory responses that all our governments are weighing.
The rapid changes transforming the financial landscape mean we can't rely on the past for answers.
Like the IAIS, we are developing a new financial stability surveillance framework.
We're also examining possible unintended negative consequences of market fragmentation.
And something that is capturing the attention of many regulators are recent proposals to launch stablecoins on a global scale.
The FSB and IAIS share many common concerns about risks to financial stability—Fintech, cyber risk and operational resilience are just some of them.

Monetary Policy, Price Stability, and Equilibrium Bond Yields: Success and Consequences
At the High-Level Conference on Global Risk, Uncertainty, And Volatility, co-sponsored by the Bank for International Settlements, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the Swiss National Bank, Zurich, Switzerland
I am honored and delighted to participate in this second annual conference on global risk, uncertainty, and volatility, cosponsored by the Federal Reserve Board, the Bank for International Settlements, and the Swiss National Bank.1 I would like especially to thank the Swiss National Bank for hosting this event.
This conference is part of continuing work across all of our institutions and the academic community to better quantify and assess the implications of risk and uncertainty.
I am pleased that this year the focus of the conference is on two of my long-standing professional interests—financial markets and monetary policy.
In particular, I would like to address an issue that has been much in focus—the decline in long-term interest rates—highlighting the role of monetary policy in contributing to that decline and the implications of that decline for the conduct of monetary policy.
The Decline in Long-Term Interest Rates and the Role of Monetary Policy
One of the most remarkable and fundamental changes in the global financial landscape over the past three decades has been the steady and significant decline in global sovereign bond yields.
From the late 1980s, when 10-year nominal Treasury yields in the United States and sovereign rates in many other major advanced economies were around 10 percent, global bond yields in the advanced economies have trended lower to levels below 2 percent today (figure 1, "Bond Yields").
To understand and interpret this decline, it is useful to think of the yield on a nominal 10-year bond as the sum of two components: investors' expectation over the next 10 years of the average level of short-term interest rates plus a term premium.
The term premium is the additional compensation—relative to investing in and rolling over short-maturity bills—that bondholders require for assuming the risk of holding a long-duration asset with greater exposure to interest rate and inflation volatility.
Importantly, according to economic theory the equilibrium term premium can be negative.
In this case, which is relevant today in the United States and some other countries, the exposure to interest rate and inflation volatility embedded in a long-maturity bond is more than offset by the potential value of the bond in hedging other risks, such as equity risk.2 The expectation of the average level of future short-term interest rates can, in turn, be decomposed into the expectation of average future real interest rates and the expectation of average future inflation rates.
With respect to expected real short-term interest rates, one reason investors expect lower future short-term interest rates is that neutral interest rates appear to have declined worldwide and are expected to remain low.
This concept of a neutral level for short-term real interest rates is referred to in the academic literature as r* and corresponds to the rate consistent with a level of aggregate demand equal to and growing in pace with aggregate supply at an unchanged rate of inflation.
Longer-run secular trends in r* largely, or even entirely, reflect fundamental "real" factors that are outside the control of a central bank.
Policymakers and academics alike, including myself, have spent considerable time exploring the reasons for and ramifications of the decline in r* across countries.3 For example, many have pointed to slowing population growth and a moderation in the pace of technological change as consistent with a lower level of r*.4 Changes in risk tolerance and regulations have led to an increase in savings and in the demand for safe assets, pushing down yields on sovereign bonds.5 Importantly, economic theory suggests and empirical research confirms that there is a significant common global component embedded in individual country r*s (figure 3, "Estimates of r*").6 This common factor driving individual country r*s not only reflects the influence of common global shocks affecting all economies in a similar way (for example, a slowdown in global productivity and the demographics associated with aging), but also results from international capital flows that respond to and, over time, tend to narrow divergences in rates of return offered across different countries.
Other things being equal, a decline in the common factor driving individual country r*s that is evident in the data would be expected to produce a comparable common decline in global bond yields.
In addition to the decline in r* around the world, lower long-term bond yields also reflect the influence of the initial downshift and ultimate anchoring of inflation expectations in many countries after the mid-1990s.
Unlike the decline in r*, which primarily reflects fundamental "real" factors that are outside the control of a central bank, the decline and ultimate anchoring of inflation and inflation expectations in both major and many emerging economies were the direct consequence of the widespread adoption and commitment to transparent, flexible inflation-targeting monetary policy strategies.
For example, in the United States, after the collapse of Bretton Woods, inflation spiraled upward, hitting double-digit rates in the 1970s and early 1980s.
But by the mid-1980s, the back of inflation had been broken (thank you, Paul Volcker), and total personal consumption expenditure (PCE) inflation averaged less than 4 percent from 1985 to 1990.
Following the 1990–91 recession, inflation fell further, and, by the mid-1990s, the conditions for price stability in the United States had been achieved (thank you, Alan Greenspan).
And, of course, this step-down in inflation has been global, with the other major advanced economies experiencing a similar shift down (table 1, "Average Inflation Rates").
Many major emerging market economies as well have seen a remarkable and very welcome decline in average inflation rates as a result of adopting and delivering on credible inflation-targeting polices.
To the extent that the step-down in inflation is expected to persist, which appears to be the case, long-term yields have reflected this decline one-for-one.
However, not only has the average level of inflation fallen, but inflation has also become more stable.
After considerable volatility in the 1970s and 1980s, over the past few decades, inflation—especially core inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices—has, with rare exceptions, moved only within a relatively narrow range in many countries despite significant swings in the prices of oil and other commodities, recessions, the Global Financial Crisis, and unprecedented monetary policy actions.
Reflecting this, inflation volatility, as measured by the standard deviation in quarterly inflation rates, has declined.
(See table 2, "Standard Deviation of Annualized Quarterly Headline Inflation Rates.")
What has been behind this global decline in inflation volatility? I would argue, as have many others, that monetary policy played a key role in reducing not only the average rate of inflation, but also the volatility of inflation.7 Inflation-targeting monetary policy can plausibly influence the variance of inflation through several channels.
For example, in a textbook DSGE (dynamic stochastic general equilibrium) model (Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (CGG), 1999) featuring a central bank that implements policy via a Taylor-type rule, the equilibrium variance of inflation will be lower the more aggressively the central bank leans against exogenous shocks that push inflation away from target.
So even if the variance of inflation shocks is constant, the variance of inflation itself will be an endogenous function of monetary policy.
Another related channel through which monetary policy can influence the variance of inflation is by changing the equilibrium persistence of inflation deviations from target.
In the textbook CGG model (1999), augmented with a hybrid Phillips curve that features an inertial backward-looking component, the equilibrium persistence of inflation is an endogenous function of the monetary policy rule such that the more aggressively the central bank leans against exogenous shocks that push inflation away from target, the less persistent are inflation deviations from target in equilibrium.
In the simple case in which equilibrium inflation is a first-order autoregressive process (as it is in the CGG (1999) model under optimal policy), the equilibrium unconditional variance of inflation is monotonic in inflation persistence for any given constant variance of inflation shocks.
For example, the variance of underlying exogenous shocks to aggregate supply and demand may have fortuitously and coincidentally fallen in tandem with the adoption of inflation targeting in many countries.
I will now turn to a third factor behind the decline in global bond yields, the decline in term premiums that is estimated to have occurred in many countries over the past 20 years.
Most studies find that term premiums have fallen substantially in major economies over the past 20 years, and that in the United States term premiums may have been negative for some time.
Decomposing the factors that drive equilibrium term premiums is an active area of academic research, and I will not attempt to summarize or synthesize this vast literature.8 But I would like to emphasize what seems to me to be three contributors to the decline in the term premium in the United States and perhaps in other countries as well.9
First, the decline in inflation volatility has almost certainly been important in driving the term premium on nominal bonds lower.
The real ex-post payoff from holding a nominal bond to maturity is directly exposed to price-level risk, and thus, all else being equal, a decline in inflation volatility makes the real purchasing power of the bond's payoff less risky.
Through this channel, the decline in inflation volatility should be reflected in a smaller inflation risk premium in nominal bond yields, which is exactly what is estimated in the Kim, Walsh, and Wei (2019) yield curve model (figure 4, "Term Premium Decomposition").
Indeed, this yield curve model attributes around 100 basis points of the decline in the U.S.
10-year nominal term premium since the early 1990s to a decline in the inflation risk premium.
A second likely contributor to the decline in the U.S.
term premium over the past decade is the Federal Reserve's substantial purchases of long-duration Treasury securities and mortgage-backed securities in three large-scale asset purchase (LSAP) programs and one maturity extension program between late 2008 and late 2014.
These purchases, which were concentrated at the longer end of the U.S.
yield curve, took duration out of the market and thus lowered the equilibrium yield required by investors to hold the reduced supply of long-duration assets instead of holding and rolling over short-maturity Treasury bills.
Estimates of the cumulative effect of these purchases on the U.S.
term premium span a wide range, with some estimates above 100 basis points.10 Moreover, the global market for sovereign bonds and currency-hedged duration is tightly integrated, and it seems likely that asset purchase programs in other major economies, such as Japan, the euro area, and the United Kingdom, have contributed as well to reducing the term premium in Treasury securities (and, of course, LSAP programs in the United States likely contributed to lower term premiums abroad).
term premium is much less widely appreciated than lower inflation volatility and LSAPs.
As documented by Campbell, Sunderam, and Viceira (CSV) (2017) and Campbell, Pflueger, and Viceira (CPV) (forthcoming), the empirical correlation between U.S.
bond and stock returns changed sign in the late 1990s from positive to negative (figure 5, "Bond–Stock Covariance in the United States").
In this period, bonds provided a diversification benefit when added to an equity portfolio (the bond return beta to stocks averaged 0.2) but not a hedge against equity risk.
Since the late 1990s, the empirical correlation between bond and stock returns has typically been negative (the bond return beta to stocks has averaged negative 0.2).
As such, we would expect the equilibrium yield on bonds to be lower than otherwise, as investors should bid up their price to reflect their value as a hedge against equity risk (relative to their value when the bond beta to stocks was positive).
According to the CAPM [capital asset pricing model], this would imply that term premia on 10-year zero-coupon Treasuries should have declined by 60 percent of the equity premium."11
As a concrete example, consider the (ex-post) hedging value of bonds for equity risk in the Global Financial Crisis.
In 2008, the total return on the S&P 500 index was around minus 37 percent, while the total return of the on-the-run 30-year Treasury bond was about 38 percent!
There is likely no single explanation for the change in sign of the correlation between equilibrium bond and stock returns in the United States and in other major countries (figure 6, "Bond–Stock Covariances in Advanced Economies").12 One recent paper that does rigorously model the changing value of bonds for hedging equity risk is by CPV.
This paper develops and estimates a habit persistence consumption asset pricing model in which the sign of the equilibrium covariance between equity and bond returns depends on the reduced-form correlation between inflation and the output gap, the correlation between the federal funds rate and the output gap, as well as the equilibrium persistence of inflation.
data, for a sample spanning 1979:Q3 to 2011:Q4, that (1) the correlation between inflation and the output gap changed sign from negative to positive; that (2) the correlation between the federal funds rate and the output gap changed sign, also from negative to positive; and that (3) the evidence of the sign change becomes statistically significant beginning in the late 1990s.
CPV also document that the transitory component of inflation becomes much less persistent after the estimated break in their sample.
The CPV paper is agnostic as to why the reduced-form correlation between inflation and the output gap and that between the federal funds rate and the output gap both change sign in their sample, but the authors do demonstrate that in their asset pricing model, these reduced-form sign changes are sufficient to generate the sign change in the correlation between equity and bond returns that we observe in the data.
monetary policy regime that began in 1979 under Paul Volcker and that was extended by Alan Greenspan in the 1990s very likely contributed to the change in the sign of the correlation between inflation and the output gap as well as the change in sign of the correlation between the federal funds rate and the output gap that we observe in the data (Clarida, Galí, and Gertler, 2000).
These are the sorts of patterns that a simple model of optimal monetary policy would produce when starting from an initial condition in which inflation is well above the (implicit) target, as was the case in 1979.
High initial inflation triggers a policy response for the central bank to push up the real policy rate well above inflation in order to push output below potential, which, via the Phillips curve, will, over time, lower inflation toward the target.
If this policy succeeds ex post, inflation expectations become anchored at the new lower level of inflation, and policy can, then, respond to demand shocks by adjusting real rates pro-cyclically, the opposite of what is required when initial inflation is too high and inflation expectations are not anchored.13 Inflation will also be pro-cyclical with well-anchored inflation expectations if demand shocks dominate and inflation expectations remain anchored.
By lowering expected inflation, by anchoring expected inflation at a low level, by contributing to a reduction in the volatility of inflation—and thus a reduction in the inflation risk premium—and by contributing to creating a hedging value of long-duration sovereign bonds, inflation-targeting monetary policy has lowered equilibrium bond yields relative to equilibrium short rates substantially compared with the experience of the 1970s and early 1980s.
These two phenomena, taken together, have resulted in sovereign bond yields that are substantially lower than the pre-crisis experience and thus substantially closer to the effective lower bound for the policy rate than they were before the crisis.
But what does this mean for monetary policy? At its most basic level, the answer to this question could depend on how far the nominal policy rate is from the effective lower bound (ELB) and the extent to which the term premium on long-duration bonds can become even more negative than it is at present (at least in the United States).14 While I do not have a precise answer to this question, I will confess that I think it highly unlikely in the next downturn, whenever it is, that 10-year U.S.
The reality of low neutral rates and equilibrium bond yields has motivated us at the Federal Reserve to take a hard look this year at our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.
The first question is, "Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective?" Central banks are generally believed to have effective tools for preventing persistent inflation overshoots.
But persistent inflation shortfalls, such as those associated with the ELB, carry the risk that longer-term inflation expectations become anchored below the stated inflation goal.16 At our September Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, we discussed options for mitigating ELB risks, including "makeup" strategies in which policymakers would promise to make up for past inflation shortfalls with a sustained accommodative stance of policy intended to generate higher future inflation.17 Such strategies provide accommodation at the ELB by keeping the policy rate low for an extended period.
Makeup strategies may also help anchor inflation expectations more firmly at 2 percent than would a policy strategy that does not compensate for past inflation misses.
But the benefits of makeup strategies depend importantly on the private sector's understanding of them as well as the belief that future policymakers will follow through on promises to keep policy accommodative.
An advantage of our current framework over makeup approaches is that it has provided the Committee with the flexibility to assess a broad range of factors and information in choosing its policy actions, and these actions can vary depending on economic circumstances in order to best achieve our dual-mandate goals.
We are also considering whether our existing monetary policy tools are adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or whether our toolkit should be expanded and, if so, how.
economy required additional support after the ELB was reached in 2008, the FOMC deployed two additional tools beyond changes to the target for the federal funds rate: balance sheet policies and forward guidance about the likely path of the federal funds rate.18 The review is examining the efficacy of these existing tools, as well as additional tools for easing policy when the ELB is binding, in light of the more recent experiences of other economies.
Finally, we are focusing on how the FOMC can improve the communication of its policy framework and actions.
Our communication practices have evolved considerably since 1994, when the Federal Reserve released the first statement after an FOMC meeting.19 As part of the review, we are assessing the Committee's current and past communications and additional forms of communication that could be helpful.
At our July 2019 FOMC meeting, the Committee began to assess what we have learned from these events and to receive briefings from System staff on topics relevant to the review.20 But we still have much to discuss at upcoming meetings.
The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new opportunities and challenges.
One of these challenges is how best to conduct monetary policy in the new world of low equilibrium interest rates.
What I can say is that any refinements or more material changes to our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today.
Stepping back, earlier today, speakers at this conference discussed the challenges of making monetary policy in an uncertain and risky environment.
In my remarks, I have laid out an important example of the interaction of the macroeconomy, monetary policy, and the market response to risk.
The papers you are about to discuss throughout the next two days present cutting-edge research on the effect and measurement of risk and uncertainty and volatility, with a special focus on monetary policy and market behavior.
"Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14.
"Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting," speech delivered at the Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 10.
"Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 30–31, 2019," press release, August 21.
"Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 17–18, 2019," press release, October 9.
"The Safe Assets Shortage Conundrum," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
"Demographics and Real Interest Rates: Inspecting the Mechanism," European Economic Review, vol.
"The Global Rise of Corporate Saving," NBER Working Paper Series 23133.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, February (revised March 2017).
"Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit" (PDF), Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some Implications for Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordination" (PDF), International Finance Discussion Papers 1244.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April.
"The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective," Journal of Economic Literature, vol.
"Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
"International Stock-Bond Correlations in a Simple Affine Asset Pricing Model," Journal of Banking and Finance, vol.
"The Rise in Corporate Saving and Cash Holding in Advanced Economies: Aggregate and Firm Level Trends," IMF Working Papers WP/18/262.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January (revised February 2017).
"Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy" (PDF), Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Low Interest Rates," speech delivered at the 40th Annual Central Banking Seminar, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, October 5.
"Why Are Interest Rates So Low? Causes and Implications," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, October 17.
"The Low Level of Global Real Interest Rates," speech delivered at the Conference to Celebrate Arminio Fraga's 60 Years, Casa das Garças, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, July 31.
"Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework?" (PDF) Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp.
"Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics" (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October
"R* and the Global Economy" (PDF) , Working Paper Series 2019-18.
"Macroeconomics and the Term Structure," Journal of Economic Literature, vol.
"The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"The Risky Steady State and the Interest Rate Lower Bound" (PDF), Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-009.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
Monetary Policy, Macroeconomic News, and Financial Conditions in Emerging Markets," unpublished working paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of International Finance, September.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," Journal of International Economics, vol.
"The Rate of Return on Everything, 1870–2015," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World" (PDF), Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 21.
"Outside the Box: Unconventional Monetary Policy in the Great Recession and Beyond," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
"Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on the Nominal Interest Rate," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Monetary Policy and Risk Management at a Time of Low Inflation and Low Unemployment," speech delivered at the 60th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Boston, October 2.
"On Falling Neutral Real Rates, Fiscal Policy, and the Risk of Secular Stagnation" (PDF), paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Spring, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8.
"Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"A New Data Set on Monetary Policy: The Economic Forecasts of Individual Members of the FOMC," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Have We Entered an Age of Secular Stagnation? IMF Fourteenth Annual Research Conference in Honor of Stanley Fischer, Washington, D.C.," IMF Economic Review, vol.
"The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123.
"Monetary Policy in a Low R-star World" (PDF), FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-23.
"The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., January 19.
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
See Cohen, Hördahl, and Xia (2018) and International Monetary Fund (2018).
See Williams (2016, 2017); Caballero, Farhi, and Gourinchas (2017); Glick (2019); Chen, Karabarbounis, and Neiman (2017); and Dao and Maggi (2018) for a discussion of the potential drivers for the increase in the supply of savings and increased demand for safe assets.
Other factors cited for lower real rates include low productivity growth (Rachel and Summers, 2019) and secular stagnation due to insufficient aggregate demand (Summers, 2015).
This view has also long been shared by fellow monetary policymakers.
For estimates of term premiums in other countries, see Cohen, Hördahl, and Xia (2018), and International Monetary Fund (2018).
Hamilton and Wu (2012) and Li and Wei (2013), among others, study the effects of the Fed's asset purchases in a term structure model setting.
To elaborate a bit, this estimate of the implied decline in term premium may be on the larger side of estimates, because the term premium represents an expected average bond risk premium over the life of the bond and because the CAPM beta is expected to shrink as the bond's remaining time-to-maturity shrinks.
Hoek, Kamin, and Yoldas (2019) show that monetary policy actions that are interpreted as responses to rising inflation have more adverse spillovers to emerging markets than actions motivated by growth shocks.
monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).
Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework.
They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes to its framework.
These risks could be exacerbated if households and businesses expect monetary policy to be insufficiently accommodative because of proximity to the ELB.
As an illustration of the shortfall in policy support created by a binding ELB during the Global Financial Crisis, the simple policy rules considered in a January 2017 speech by then-Chair Janet Yellen prescribed setting the federal funds rate between negative 1-1/2 and negative 9 percent; see Yellen (2017).
In addition to using these two additional monetary policy tools, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of other measures to stabilize the financial system, increase household and business confidence, and more generally support the economic recovery.
These supplementary measures included the setting up of several credit facilities and the introduction of stress tests for systemically important financial institutions.
Over the past decade or so, the FOMC has enhanced its communication both to promote public understanding of its policy goals, strategy, and actions and to foster democratic accountability.
These enhancements include the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy; post-meeting press conferences; various statements about the principles and strategy guiding the Committee's normalization of monetary policy; and quarterly summaries of individual FOMC participants' economic projections, assessments about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, and judgments of the uncertainty and balance of risks around their projections.
Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve published a summary of individual economic projections from various Board members, FOMC members, or FOMC participants in the semiannual Monetary Policy Report.
With the introduction of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in 2007, the FOMC increased the frequency of the releases of policymaker projections, expanded the set of economic variables included, and extended the forecast horizon.
Because the SEP includes individual contributions of projections and assessments from all FOMC participants, it captures a broader range of views than those of FOMC members.

Why Climate Change Matters for Monetary Policy and Financial Stability
At "The Economics of Climate Change" a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California
I want to thank my colleagues at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, especially Mary Daly, Galina Hale, Òscar Jordà, and Glenn Rudebusch, for organizing this research conference.1 The presentations today provide important insights into the many important ways climate-related risks may affect our financial system and broader economy.2
Some have described PG&E's bankruptcy as the first climate change bankruptcy.3 Some insurers have discontinued policies in fire-prone areas, which, in turn, is changing the costs of homeownership and the risk profiles of previously underwritten mortgages.4 Yet we can also see not far from here the promise of green innovation.5
So how does climate change fit into the work of the Federal Reserve? To support a strong economy and a stable financial system, the Federal Reserve needs to analyze and adapt to important changes to the economy and financial system.
Climate risks are projected to have profound effects on the U.S.
economy and financial system.6 To fulfill our core responsibilities, it will be important for the Federal Reserve to study the implications of climate change for the economy and the financial system and to adapt our work accordingly.
Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve specific responsibilities in monetary policy, financial stability, financial regulation and supervision, community and consumer affairs, and payments.
Increasingly, it will be important for the Federal Reserve to take into account the effects of climate change and associated policies in setting monetary policy to achieve our objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
Monetary policy seeks to buffer the economy from unexpected adverse disruptions, or "shocks." It is generally more challenging for monetary policy to insulate the economy from shocks to the supply side of the economy than to the demand side.
So it is vital for monetary policymakers to understand the nature of climate disturbances to the economy, as well as their likely persistence and breadth, in order to respond effectively.
For instance, monetary policymakers must accurately assess how disasters such as hurricanes, wildfires, and flooding affect labor markets, household and business spending, output, and prices.7 In deciding whether to alter monetary policy or, instead, to "look through" such shocks, policymakers need to assess the likely persistence of the effects and how widespread they are.
Because there is considerable uncertainty about the persistence, breadth, and magnitude of climate-related shocks to the economy, it could be challenging to assess what adjustments to monetary policy are likely to be most effective at keeping the economy operating at potential with maximum employment and price stability.8 We need only look back to the oil price shocks of the 1970s and 1980s to see how difficult it was for monetary policymakers to assess accurately the likely persistence of the effects on inflation and output and the appropriate response.
To the extent that climate change and the associated policy responses affect productivity and long-run economic growth, there may be implications for the long-run neutral level of the real interest rate, which is a key consideration in monetary policy.
As the frequency of heat waves increases, research indicates there could be important effects on output and labor productivity.9 A shifting energy landscape, rising insurance premiums, and increasing spending on climate change adaptations—such as air conditioning and elevating homes out of floodplains—will have implications for economic activity and inflation.
As policies are implemented to mitigate climate change, they will affect prices, productivity, employment, and output in ways that could have implications for monetary policy.
Just on its own, the large amount of uncertainty regarding climate-related events and policies could hold back investment and economic activity.10
Second, the Federal Reserve will need to assess the financial system for vulnerabilities to important climate risks.
The Federal Reserve has important responsibilities for safeguarding the stability of our financial system so that it can continue to meet household and business needs for financial services when hit by negative shocks.
Similar to other significant risks, such as cyberattacks, we want our financial system to be resilient to the effects of climate change.11
Although there is substantial uncertainty surrounding how or when shifts in asset valuations might occur, we can begin to identify the factors that could propagate losses from natural disasters, energy disruptions, and sudden shifts in the value of climate-exposed properties.
As was the case with mortgages before the financial crisis, correlated risks from these kinds of trends could have an effect that reaches beyond individual banks and borrowers to the broader financial system and economy.
As with other financial stability vulnerabilities arising from macroeconomic risks, feedback loops could develop between the effects on the real economy and those on financial markets.
The associated declines in wealth could amplify the effects on economic activity, which could have further knock-on effects on financial markets.
Beyond these physical risks, policymakers in some jurisdictions are assessing the resilience of the financial system to so-called transition risks: the risks associated with the transition to a policy framework that curtails emissions.
Although this work is at an early stage, thousands of companies around the world are now reporting climate-related financial exposures to the Carbon Disclosure Project (CDP) under the guidelines of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures (TCFD).12 Based on these disclosures, the CDP estimates that the 500 largest companies by market capitalization are exposed to nearly $1 trillion in risk, half of which is expected to materialize in the next five years.
A majority of the reporting companies integrate climate risk into their business strategies and their broader risk-management frameworks.
An essential element of our bank supervision and regulation duties is assessing banks' risk-management systems.
We expect banks to have systems in place that appropriately identify, measure, control, and monitor all of their material risks.13 These risks may include severe weather events that can disrupt standard clearing and settlement activity and increase the demand for cash.
Banks also need to manage risks surrounding potential loan losses resulting from business interruptions and bankruptcies associated with natural disasters, including risks associated with loans to properties that are likely to become uninsurable or activities that are highly exposed to climate risks.
The Federal Reserve also has important responsibilities in community reinvestment, which increasingly encompass recovering from and building resilience against natural disasters and severe weather events.
Under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), banks have an affirmative obligation to meet the needs of their local communities, including low- and moderate-income communities.
In recent years, the banking agencies have issued a number of statements to clarify that disaster recovery efforts are CRA-eligible activities.14 Our Community Advisory Council has urged more research on the effect of climate change on low- to moderate-income communities in order to help inform more effective responses.15 Working with local communities, the Federal Reserve staff have highlighted the ways in which lower-income households and underserved areas tend to be particularly vulnerable to natural disasters.16 With low levels of liquid savings to meet emergency expenditures, these households tend to be less resilient to the temporary loss of income, property damage, and health outcomes they face from disasters.17 In our community development work, we seek to encourage lenders and their local communities to rebuild in ways that will increase their resilience to future risks.
The staff across the Federal Reserve System are researching a wide range of topics related to climate risks, including how weather and natural disasters affect economic and financial outcomes and the economic implications of climate policies, including for the energy sector.18 We currently assess the effects of severe weather events for all our work—from forecasts for the Federal Open Market Committee to guidance provided to banks in the wake of federal disaster declarations to our efforts to understand the effects on low- to moderate-income communities.19
Work to understand the implications of climate-related risks for our economy and financial system is at an early stage.
In that regard, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission's (CFTC) vote to establish the Climate-Related Market Risk Subcommittee is noteworthy, and I look forward to their observations.20
We also benefit from working with international peers who are taking the lead on understanding the effects of climate-related risks on their financial systems.
We are participating in climate-related discussions at the FSB and other standard-setting bodies, and we will continue to support the work of the FSB's TCFD in order to improve standardization of financial disclosures related to climate change.
Along with other officials with financial stability responsibilities, I have been following the Bank of England's plans to assess climate risks to the financial system, including through their exploratory stress-test scenario.
And we are in discussions about how we might participate in the Central Banks and Supervisors Network for Greening the Financial System in order to learn from our international colleagues' approaches to measuring and managing climate risks in the financial system.
We also have a lot to learn from the broader research community about the economic and financial effects of climate change.
As we have seen today, researchers are making progress on addressing questions regarding how climate change relates to labor markets, trade policy, and monetary policy.
By participating more actively in climate-related research and practice, the Federal Reserve can be more effective in supporting a strong economy and a stable financial system.
I am grateful to Brigitte Roth Tran of the Federal Reserve Board for assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Rudebusch (2019), "Climate Change and the Federal Reserve," FRBSF Economic Letter 2019‑09 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, March).
Energy Information Administration (2019), "Combined Wind and Solar Made Up at Least 20% of Electric Generation in 10 States in 2017," and California Energy Commission (2019), "Energy Research and Development Division," and "Highlighting Energy Innovation by the Numbers." Return to text
Global Change Research Program (2018), Fourth National Climate Assessment: Volume II: Impacts, Risks, and Adaptation in the United States (Washington: USGCRP).
Polachek (2009), "How Disasters Affect Local Labor Markets: The Effects of Hurricanes in Florida," Journal of Human Resources, vol.
Jina (2014), "The Causal Effect of Environmental Catastrophe on Long-Run Economic Growth: Evidence from 6,700 Cyclones," NBER Working Paper Series 20352 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July).
Wilcoxen (2017), "Climate Change and Monetary Policy: Dealing with Disruption (PDF)," CAMA Working Paper 77/2017 (Canberra, Australia: Crawford School of Public Policy, Australian National University, December); Benoît Coeuré (2018), "Monetary Policy and Climate Change," speech delivered at "Scaling up Green Finance: The Role of Central Banks," a conference sponsored by the Network for Greening the Financial System, the Deutsche Bundesbank, and the Council on Economic Policies, Berlin, November 8.
Riccardo Colacito, Bridget Hoffman, and Toan Phan (2018), "Temperature and Growth: A Panel Analysis of the United States." Working Paper 18-09 (Richmond, VA: Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, March).
Watugala (2019), "Pricing Poseidon: Extreme Weather Uncertainty and Firm Return Dynamics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-054 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July).
Nicolette Bartlett and Tom Coleman (2019), Major Risk or Rosy Opportunity: Are Companies Ready for Climate Change? (London: CDP), https://6fefcbb86e61af1b2fc4-c70d8ead6ced550b4d987d7c03fcdd1d.ssl.cf3.rackcdn.com/cms/reports/documents/000/004/588/original/CDP_Climate_Change_report_2019.pdf?1562321876.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (1995), "Rating the Adequacy of Risk Management Processes and Internal Controls at State Member Banks and Bank Holding Companies," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 95-51 (November 14); Board of Governors, BS&R (2016), "Supervisory Guidance for Assessing Risk Management at Supervised Institutions with Total Consolidated Assets Less than $50 Billion," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 16-11 (June 8); and Board of Governors, BS&R (2017), "Interagency Guidelines Establishing Standards for Safety and Soundness," Compliance Guideline 12 CFR 208 D-1.
Kevin Dancy (2018), "Weathering the Storm: A Framework for Meeting CRA Obligations," Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Community Development Publications (Dallas: FRB Dallas, August).
Community Advisory Council and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), Record of Meeting (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, May 26).
Keenan and Elizabeth Mattiuzzi (2019), "Climate Adaptation Investment and the Community Reinvestment Act," Community Development Research Brief 2019-5 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, June).
Community Advisory Council and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), Record of Meeting (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, November 1).
See, for example Justin Bloesch and François Gourio (2015), "The Effect of Winter Weather on U.S.
Economic Activity," Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Economic Perspectives, vol.
1–20; Justin Gallagher and Daniel Hartley (2015), "Household Finance after a Natural Disaster: The Case of Hurricane Katrina," Working Paper 14-06R (Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, December); Daniel J.
Wilson (2017), "The Impact of Weather on Local Employment: Using Big Data on Small Places (PDF)," Working Paper 2016-21 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, June); and Brigitte Roth Tran (2019), "Sellin' in the Rain: Adaptation to Weather and Climate in the Retail Sector (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-067 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).
Peterman (2016), "The Distributional Effects of a Carbon Tax on Current and Future Generations (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-038 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April).
Blonz (2019), "The Welfare Costs of Misaligned Incentives: Energy Inefficiency and the Principal–Agent Problem (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-071 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September); and Martin Stuermer and Gregor Schwerhoff (2015), "Non-Renewable Resources, Extraction Technology, and Endogenous Growth (PDF)," Working Paper 1506 (Dallas: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, December).
See Kimberly Bayard, Ryan Decker, and Charles Gilbert (2017), "Natural Disasters and the Measurement of Industrial Production: Hurricane Harvey, a Case Study," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 11); Aditya Aladangady, Shifrah Aron-Dine, Wendy E.
Dunn, Laura Feiveson, Paul Lengermann, and Claudia Sahm (2016), "The Effect of Hurricane Matthew on Consumer Spending," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 2); and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2017), "Interagency Supervisory Examiner Guidance for Institutions Affected by a Major Disaster (PDF)," SR 17-14 (December 15).
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2019), "CFTC Commissioner Behnam Announces the Establishment of the Market Risk Advisory Committee's Climate-Related Market Risk Subcommittee and Seeks Nominations for Membership," press release, July 10.

This vast range has caused some to undervalue his contributions as an economist, notwithstanding his eventual Nobel Prize—when Hayek moved to the United States in 1950, the University of Chicago Economics Department would not hire him because, as Milton Friedman said, "At that stage, he really wasn't doing any economics," and Paul Krugman famously said that "the Hayek thing is almost entirely about politics, not economics."2 Others believe his broader thought, while seminal, was inconsistent across these various areas, and Hayek himself never demonstrated how it all hung together.
In my contribution to the discussion today, I want to examine a particular example of the lasting effect that Hayek has had on economic thinking—one pertaining to the importance of freely determined prices for producing efficient economic outcomes—and consider how Hayek's insights in this area can, in fact, tie together the various strands of his larger philosophy.
So as not to appear entirely out of touch with more immediate developments, I will end by descending from the empyrean to the terrestrial with a discussion of the economic outlook and the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) policy decision from earlier this week.
Hayek's contributions to economics ranged widely, and many were important and of lasting influence.
Among them were his studies of the relationship between the economic and political arrangements of a society.
That body of work included, of course, his celebrated book The Road to Serfdom, which was published 75 years ago this year and is a focus of this event, as well as his later monograph, The Constitution of Liberty.3 In addition, Hayek contributed prominently to monetary analysis.
Today, however, I will be concerned instead with still another key contribution that Hayek made to economic analysis: understanding the operation of the price system.
This contribution was formalized in his most famous paper in the economic-research literature: his article "The Use of Knowledge in Society," which was published in the American Economic Review in September 1945.6
In 1974, the press release by the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences that announced Hayek's Nobel Prize in Economics stated: "The Academy is of the opinion that von Hayek's analysis of the functional efficiency of different economic systems is one of his most significant contributions to economic research in the broader sense.
His conclusion is that only by far-reaching decentralization in a market system with competition and free price-fixing is it possible to make full use of knowledge and information."7
More recently, this paper received further prominent acclaim when it was categorized by an expert panel as being one of the top 20 articles ever published in the American Economic Review.8
With regard to the paper's contribution to the understanding of economic processes, an illuminating discussion was provided in 2005 by Oliver Williamson—himself later a Nobel laureate in economics.
Williamson cited Hayek's 1945 paper, along with Adam Smith's The Wealth of Nations from the eighteenth century, as forming the core of a "venerated tradition in economics" of studying the notion of "spontaneous order" arising from a freely operating market system.9
How does Hayek's case for the price system fit in alongside the other work that Williamson mentioned? As Paul Samuelson—yet another Nobel Prize winner—had occasion to note, the argument for the price system that Hayek articulated in 1945 was complementary with, but distinct from, the argument that Adam Smith espoused in The Wealth of Nations.10 Smith focused on how market mechanisms guide producers toward satisfying consumers' wants.
Hayek instead stressed how the market mechanism makes, as he put it, "fuller use...of the existing knowledge" than a directed economy is able to do.11
Hayek emphasized that the signals transmitted by the various individual prices in the economy could, together, serve as a useful means of guiding overall resource allocation.
The reason is that prices convey messages to consumers and producers even when the information that drives prices is not aggregated or directly observed.12 For example, a large increase or decrease in the price of gasoline conveys information that influences consumer behavior and that also affects the behavior of energy producers, even when neither of these sets of market participants are aware of the precise factor initiating the price change.
As a related matter, Hayek recognized that prices transmit information even in a situation in which much of that information is not explicitly disclosed by one market participant to another, or even consciously articulable by any market participant at all.
Hayek believed that all of us "know" many things that we cannot articulate but that we nevertheless act on in practical situations, and the price system can therefore aggregate and transmit that knowledge which we could not otherwise convey.
Hayek's analysis had implications for the viability of different economic systems.
With regard to centrally planned economic systems—which had considerable support in the West in 1945, in light of the increased use of government economic controls in many countries during World War II and the dismal performance of market economies during the Great Depression—Hayek's analysis suggested that these systems would likely exhibit great inefficiency.
To Hayek, it was totally unrealistic to expect an economy to operate efficiently if it was based on the "direction of the whole economic system according to one unified plan," as such a plan lacked the valuable information embedded in market-determined prices.13
...Nobody can possibly know all the information you need to run a centrally planned economy."14 Hayek's economic analysis therefore complemented the philosophical and political arguments he marshaled against centrally planned economies in The Road to Serfdom.
Again, it is important to recognize that this is not a contingent or technological problem.
Rather, as already mentioned, we all know many important things that we cannot articulate; and many of these things we come to know precisely through our participation in trade and exchange through the market.
This type of knowledge (a) is by its nature not conveyable to a central planner because we are not fully aware of all we know, and (b) would not even exist apart from the social interactions facilitated by the market which a central planner would replace.
The flip side of Hayek's analysis was that, while there are insurmountable obstacles to economic efficiency via a central plan, an efficient economy may still be obtainable by letting the price system work.
To quote Mankiw again, Hayek's analysis implies that "markets figure out a way to aggregate, in a decentralized way, dispersed information into desirable outcomes."15 Furthermore, this mechanism does not require the government or any one individual to process that dispersed information into a central network or to be able to aggregate the information into a statistical series.
This information is recorded in such prices because they respond to the behavior of individual buyers and sellers in the economy.16 Consequently, as longtime Hayek scholar Gerald O'Driscoll has observed: "What particularly recommends the price system to Hayek is the 'economy of knowledge' with which it operates.
Hayek's 1945 paper has had a great influence on subsequent economic research.
It has been found to be highly relevant to a variety of areas of economic inquiry.
For example, Hayek's analysis has proved valuable in the development of standard microeconomics, since his contribution deepened economists' understanding of the working of the price system and promoted further investigation of the question of how decentralized information is transmitted by markets.18 Hayek's emphasis on prices as processors of information has also had applications to international trade theory.19 And in macroeconomics and monetary theory, Milton Friedman's Nobel lecture, published in 1977, cited Hayek's 1945 paper when arguing that, because it disrupted the signals arising from relative-price movements, inflation both lowered the efficiency of the economy and led output to deviate from its natural (or full-employment) level.20 Hayek likened the price mechanism to a "system of telecommunications," and Friedman's description of inflation as a form of "static" interrupting price signals was in keeping with this analogy.21
I do not want to leave the impression, however, that all of the conclusions in Hayek's 1945 paper have become unchallenged principles chiseled into the economic consensus.
On the contrary, one of the reasons why the paper has been so influential is that it remains a benchmark reference for understanding the case for relying primarily on a market system, based on freely determined prices, for determining the production and allocation of resources.
The paper has therefore set a high bar for preempting the price system or for other interventions in the market: When economists point to cases in which market mechanisms can be improved on by regulation or other public-sector intervention, or to instances in which price signals do not appear to be operating effectively, they need to identify a specific market failure as the source of the inefficiency.
Essentially, they need to establish instances in which the price system can be improved on as a means of processing information.23
For example, one of the important events that raised doubts about the functioning of the private market's pricing process occurred in the years leading up to the financial crisis.
One of my predecessors at the Federal Reserve Board, Donald Kohn, has noted the seeming herd-like behavior of financial markets in the pre-crisis period that generated this situation—an "underpricing of risk."24
The financial crisis, and the deep recession that followed it, prompted changes in the United States' regulatory framework.
These changes have been designed to make the financial system more resilient than it was before the crisis.
By creating appropriate incentives and rules, they should also encourage financial markets to price risk more appropriately than they did in the years leading up to the crisis—for example, by reducing the danger of investor complacency regarding the riskiness of their investments and the possibility of adverse scenarios.
If we follow Hayek and regard the price system as like a telecommunications network, and then apply that metaphor to the financial sector, we can think of the institutional and regulatory changes to the financial system over the past decade as designed to improve the reliability and signal quality of the transmissions.25
How does all of this relate to the larger questions of philosophy and social order to which Hayek devoted much of his thought? Hayek's insights about the price system depend importantly on his theory of knowledge: The information that is available to us as a society is the aggregate of the highly dispersed and sometimes inarticulate knowledge possessed by each of us individually.
It is not only hard to convey that information to a central authority for processing into a rational decision—it is also conceptually impossible given the nature of that knowledge.
And, indeed, important parts of that knowledge will not even be generated except through our interaction with each other through the mechanism of the market.
Trying to centralize economic decisionmaking, then, is not just too hard to do as a practical matter.
Thus, even if some technological way to aggregate information other than through prices could be invented, it would lead to less efficient, less humane outcomes because it would be based on less total human information.
As Hayek says in The Constitution of Liberty, "[C]ivilization begins when the individual in pursuit of his ends can make use of more knowledge than he himself acquired and when he can transcend the boundaries of his ignorance by profiting from knowledge that he himself does not possess."26 I think this ties together the various threads of Hayek's thought throughout a long life: his early work on psychology ("How do we know?"), his later epistemology ("What do we know, and what does it mean to know it?"), his economics ("How do we make knowledge usable?"), and his social and political theory ("What institutions will ensure that the greatest amount of human knowledge will be usable in the pursuit of their human fulfillment?").
Now I would like to turn to the current economic scene and this week's FOMC decision.
economy is doing well, and I am optimistic about the outlook.
Economic conditions are currently very close to meeting our—that is, the FOMC's—dual-mandate objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability.
A particular source of strength has been the labor market.
Setting aside the monthly volatility and, specifically, the effects of the recent strike at General Motors, labor market indicators are as strong as they have been in quite some time.
The unemployment rate has been running near a 50-year low, and the proportion of the population currently employed is close to its highest level in a decade.
Encouragingly, labor force participation has held up, as the tight labor market has motivated workers to either join or remain in the labor force, halting, at least for the time being, a long-standing downward trend.
Although the pace of job gains has slowed this year, we expected some deceleration because of how low the unemployment rate has fallen.
A strong job market and high employment have in turn supported economic growth.
Personal consumption expenditures (PCE) grew 2-1/2 percent over the past four quarters, a healthy pace by historical standards and a major contributor to overall growth since consumption represents over two-thirds of economic activity.
Because the labor market remains tight, I expect wage growth to pick up, which would then in turn underpin further strength in consumption and overall growth.
For the other half of our mandate, inflation as measured by the PCE index was 1.3 percent over the 12 months ending in September, while core PCE inflation, which excludes increases in the prices of food and energy, was 1.7 percent.
While these readings are below our 2 percent inflation objective, they are fairly close, and my assessment is that inflation will inch toward our objective in the coming months.
Outside the near term, I am also optimistic about the longer-term potential of the U.S.
I am heartened by a recent pickup in labor productivity growth.
A notable development of the post-crisis period has been the abysmal pace of labor productivity growth.
After averaging about a 2-1/4 percent pace in the two decades leading up to the crisis, labor productivity growth has been closer to 1 percent, on average, since 2011.
Although the quarterly data are volatile, I have been encouraged by a pickup in labor productivity in the first half of this year, when it grew at a 3 percent annual rate.
Further out, I admit to being a bit of techno-enthusiast, and I see the potential for many emerging technologies, including 5G communications, artificial intelligence and machine learning, and 3-D printing, to further boost productivity growth in the coming years.
One prominent factor weighing on a relatively robust domestic economy has been weak growth among our trading partners.
The International Monetary Fund projects that global economic growth in 2019 will be the slowest since the financial crisis.
I find the weakness of investment to be of particular concern because increasing investment and the capital stock are important for raising the potential capacity of the economy.
It is likely that some of the weakness in capital spending is a result of elevated uncertainty, for foreign growth generally but also specifically for trade developments.
Against this backdrop, at our meeting earlier this week, we decided to lower our target range for the federal funds rate for the third time this year.
economy strong in the face of global developments and to provide some insurance against ongoing risks.
By lowering the federal funds rate this year, we are supporting the continued expansion of the economy.
Overall, with these policy adjustments, I believe that the economy will remain in a good place, with the labor market remaining strong and inflation staying close to our 2 percent objective.
We see the current stance of monetary policy as likely to remain appropriate as long as incoming information about the economy continues to be broadly consistent with our outlook of moderate economic growth, a strong labor market, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective.
"100 Years of the American Economic Review: The Top 20 Articles," American Economic Review, vol.
"Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 30–31, 2019," press release, August 21.
"Digital Currencies, Stablecoins, and the Evolving Payments Landscape," speech delivered at "The Future of Money in the Digital Age," a conference sponsored by the Peterson Institute for International Economics and Princeton University's Bendheim Center for Finance, Washington, October 16.
"The Digitalization of Money," paper presented at "The Future of Money in the Digital Age (PDF)," a conference held at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 16.
"The Road to Serfdom after 75 Years," Journal of Economic Literature.
"Nobel Lecture: Inflation and Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy, vol.
"The Use of Knowledge in Society," American Economic Review, vol.
"Comments on 'Financial Intermediation and the Post-Crisis Financial System,' " speech delivered at the Eighth BIS Annual Conference 2009, Financial System and Macroeconomic Resilience: Revisited, Basel, Switzerland, July 10.
Gregory Mankiw: America's Economy and the Case for Free Markets," Conversations with Bill Kristol, interview, April 9, YouTube video, 1:06:03, https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=QY4M6a56nFs.
"Perspectives on Mechanism Design in Economic Theory," American Economic Review, vol.
"The Financial Stability Board at 10 Years—Looking Back and Looking Ahead," speech delivered at the European Banking Federation's European Banking Summit, Brussels, October 3.
"Economics Prize for Works in Economic Theory and Inter-Disciplinary Research," press release, October 9.
"Decentralized Information and the Walrasian Outcome: A Pairwise Meetings Market with Private Values," Journal of Mathematical Economics, vol.
Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
"Financial Stability a Decade after the Onset of the Crisis," speech delivered at "Fostering a Dynamic Global Economy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., Aug.
All of my remarks today represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Open Market Committee, or the Financial Stability Board.
My Board colleague, Lael Brainard, has recently discussed the policy implications of electronic money.
The potential implications of privately issued currency in the form of stablecoins are under active consideration by the Financial Stability Board, which I chair, in work to be delivered to the Group of Twenty later next year.
Hayek's analysis therefore differed from general equilibrium approaches to economic problems, exemplified by the work of Arrow and Debreu (1954).
Such approaches tend to evaluate market outcomes in terms of their ability to reproduce the allocation decided on by a hypothetical social planner who possesses complete knowledge of all information in the economy and who is charged with maximizing the welfare of the community.
The process is interactive, with market participants not only influencing prices, but also responding to price signals.
For example, an article in the area of international trade noted (Bernhofen and Brown, 2004, p.
49): "The insight that prices contain the relevant information about underlying economic fundamentals goes back to the pioneering work of Hayek (1945)." Return to text
The notion that distortions to relative-price patterns lead the economy's output level to deviate from its natural value would be formalized by Woodford (2003).
527), and, for Friedman's use of the analogy between inflation and static, see Friedman and Friedman (1980, pp.
1468) noted that the 1945 Hayek paper recognized that "the central problem of economics was a problem of knowledge or information"—and so it anticipated the field of the economics of information.
586) credited Hayek's "widely influential paper" with helping spur mechanism-design research—by characterizing alternative institutional frameworks as different mechanisms for "communicating widely dispersed information about the desires and the resources of different individuals in society." Return to text
For example, while Stiglitz (2000) agreed that the price system is a means of collecting and transmitting dispersed information, he took issue with the notion that this system always produced the most efficient economic equilibrium.
Specifically, Stiglitz argued that incomplete information could lead to unnecessarily high unemployment and other undesirable outcomes that could be improved on by government intervention.
115) noted in response to Hayek's (1945) position: "It can immediately be argued that the fact that much information is private is not on its own sufficient to warrant the unfettered play of market forces to be judged the best possible resource allocation mechanism." Return to text

I appreciate this opportunity to speak today at the Japan Society, a respected institution dedicated to studying, advocating, and expanding interactions between the United States and Japan.1 While the society's remit is broad and includes arts, culture, and education, I will, perhaps not surprisingly, focus my remarks on our two economies.
Japan is an important economic partner of the United States, and our economies are linked through trade in goods and services as well as capital flows that affect interest rates and other aspects of financial markets.
Through these channels, developments in Japan can affect economic conditions in the United States, and vice versa.
More broadly, beyond bilateral linkages, economic conditions in United States and Japan are tightly linked to global economic developments, and today I will discuss several of the global factors that are relevant to the outlook for both economies.
outlook and some key global risks to that outlook that we are monitoring at the Federal Reserve.
I will next elaborate on the channels through which global factors affect domestic economic conditions in the United States and, in some cases, also Japan.
I will conclude with some remarks about the monetary policy decision we announced on Wednesday.
The current economic expansion, now in its 11th year, is the longest on record, and the economy continues to advance at a moderate pace, with real gross domestic product (GDP) growth running at 2 percent over the past year and 1.9 percent in the most recent quarter.
Growth has been supported by the continued strength of household consumption, underpinned, in turn, by a thriving labor market.
The unemployment rate is near a half-century low, real wages are rising, and workers who had earlier left the labor force are returning to find jobs.
There is no sign that cost-push pressures are putting excessive upward force on price inflation, and to me, plausible estimates of the natural rate of unemployment extend from just above 4 percent to the current level.
Core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation over the 12 months ending in September, at 1.7 percent, remains muted, and headline inflation, currently running at 1.3 percent, is likely this year to fall somewhat below our 2 percent objective.
Price stability, as I see it, requires that inflation expectations as well as actual inflation be stable and consistent with our 2 percent inflation target.
We do not directly observe inflation expectations, and I myself consult a wide range of survey and market estimates.
Based on these estimates, I judge that measures of inflation expectations reside at the low end of a range I consider consistent with price stability.
economy is favorable, there are some evident downside risks to this outlook.
Global growth has been sluggish since the middle of 2018.
This slowdown in global growth as well as increased uncertainty about the outlook for global trade policy appear to be headwinds for manufacturing activity and investment spending in the United States and abroad.2 Also another source of uncertainty in the global economy has been and continues to be Brexit.
The global growth outlook also depends importantly on the strength and sustainability of continued economic expansion in China.
China is balancing its desire to curtail credit growth and promote deleveraging against its understandable aspiration to maintain a rapid pace of economic growth in a country of 1.4 billion people.
Finally, global disinflationary forces remain and present ongoing challenges to many central banks in their efforts to achieve and maintain price stability.
outlook, and, as my colleagues and I at the Federal Reserve have emphasized, these headwinds have been a prominent consideration in our recent monetary policy assessments.
I would now like to elaborate on some of the channels through which foreign developments more generally might be expected to affect the outlook for the U.S.
Perhaps the most direct link between economic conditions abroad and in the United States is foreign demand for U.S.
To be sure, exports account for a smaller share of the U.S.
economy—about 12 percent—than the global average of about 30 percent.
The pace of economic expansion abroad is a key determinant of the demand for U.S.
Most recently, the International Monetary Fund projects foreign GDP growth in 2019 to have slowed to its weakest pace since the financial crisis.
exports also have slowed as a result of a decline in exports to China following the imposition of tariffs on U.S.
goods and also more recently because of production-related disruptions in aircraft deliveries.
The pace of economic growth in our major trading partners affects the demand for U.S.
When foreign growth weakens and central banks abroad ease monetary policy to support their domestic economies, returns on dollar assets appear relatively more attractive, capital flows into U.S.
markets, and these flows will tend to boost the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
In addition, elevated uncertainties about the global outlook and/or other evidence of financial stress abroad can also drive up the value of the dollar, as investors flow into the safe haven traditionally provided by U.S.
That being said, I would note that the value of the dollar does not appear to play much of a role in explaining the decline in U.S.
The current level of the trade-weighted dollar is about where it has been, on average, over the past few years.
However, looking back several years, the 25 percent appreciation of the dollar that occurred in 2014 was an important contributing factor to the previous noticeable decline in U.S.
Global financial markets also link the United States to the global economy, and developments abroad can spill over into domestic financial conditions, with material effects on domestic activity.
This is particularly evident during episodes of global financial stress, in which "risk-off" shifts in sentiment can depress U.S.
equity prices and widen domestic credit spreads even as flight-to-safety flows push down U.S.
economy were notably pronounced during the 1998 Russian crisis, the euro-area debt crisis earlier this decade, and the China devaluation episode of 2015–16.
Recently, global financial spillovers have contributed to the significant decline in U.S.
Since the market for debt is global, low—and, in many cases, negative—yields abroad encourage capital inflows that put downward pressure on U.S.
Equity prices have also reacted to global developments and recently appear particularly sensitive to news about the outlook for U.S.
Global factors have likely also contributed to the estimated decline in the neutral rate of interest, or r*, that we have observed in the United States and many other countries.
Slow productivity growth and population aging have lowered potential growth rates in major foreign economies, decreasing demand for investment and increasing desired saving, both of which have contributed to lower equilibrium interest rates abroad, with spillovers to the rest of the world, including in the United States.4
aggregate demand and supply that I just described—can alter U.S.
Foreign factors can also directly affect the prices paid by U.S.
firms and consumers, particularly, but not exclusively, for imported goods.
An appreciation of the dollar can lower the dollar price of U.S.
imports, although empirically, this effect is less than one-for-one, as foreign exporters tend to keep the dollar prices of their goods comparatively stable relative to observed exchange rate fluctuations.5 In addition, swings in global commodity prices influence U.S.
Over the past year, the rise in the dollar and falling oil prices have been important contributors to the subdued pace of U.S.
However, despite some important differences that I will note, the Japanese economy exhibits some notable similarities to the United States, both in terms of its overall performance and its exposure to the global economy.
To begin with, Japanese growth, while slower than in the United States, has been running above the pace needed to absorb new entrants to the labor force, and its strong labor market is operating with an unemployment rate near multidecade lows at 2.2 percent.
Also, as in the United States, weak exports have recently been a drag on Japanese growth.
But, like the United States, Japan has been less exposed to the global slowdown than many other economies.
Exports represent only 17 percent of Japanese GDP, higher than in the United States but well below the 30 percent global average I mentioned earlier.
In some respects, however, Japan is more strongly linked to the global economy than is the United States.
One example is the relationship between episodes of global financial stress and the exchange rate.
In times of stress, the dollar tends to appreciate as investors seek the safety of U.S.
The same is even more true for Japan, with the yen often recording even stronger appreciation than the dollar in times of increased risk aversion.
Other channels operate differently because of structural differences between the United States and Japan.
In the United States, almost all trade, both imports and exports, is invoiced in dollars.
One aspect of this, as mentioned earlier, is that changes in the value of the dollar tend to have a relatively limited effect on U.S.
Despite the importance of the yen in global financial markets, a significant portion of Japan's trade is also invoiced in dollars rather than yen, including not only Japan's exports to the United States, but also its exports to other countries in Asia.6 Some scholars have proposed that the importance of the dollar in Japan's trade lessens the responsiveness of Japan's exports to movements in the yen while making exports more sensitive to changes in the value of the dollar and, therefore, U.S.
Regarding inflation, through the considerable efforts of the Bank of Japan's quantitative and qualitative monetary easing program launched in early 2013, Japan has emerged from almost 15 years of modest deflation and is now operating with a positive inflation rate.
While the inflation remains below the Bank of Japan's long-run objective of 2 percent, it represents a notable accomplishment given the difficulty of changing public inflation expectations after a long period of modest deflation in consumer prices.
Returning to the United States, I would like to wrap up with a brief discussion of our monetary policy decision this week.
At our meeting earlier this week, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) lowered the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point, bringing the range to 1-1/2 to 1-3/4 percent—the third such reduction this year.8 As Chair Powell noted in his press conference, the Committee took these actions to help keep the U.S.
economy strong in the face of global developments and to provide some insurance against ongoing risks.
The policy adjustments we have made since last year are providing—and will continue to provide—meaningful support to the economy.
The economy is in a good place, and monetary policy is in a good place.
The policy adjustments we have made to date will continue to provide significant support for the economy.
Since monetary policy operates with a lag, the full effects of these adjustments on economic growth, the job market, and inflation will be realized over time.
We see the current stance of monetary policy as likely to remain appropriate as long as incoming information about the economy remains broadly consistent with our outlook of moderate economic growth, a strong labor market, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective.
Policy is not on a preset course, and we will be monitoring the effects of our policy actions, along with other information bearing on the outlook, as we assess, at each future meeting, the appropriate path of the target range for the federal funds rate.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Caldara and others find that increased trade policy uncertainty, independent of the actual effect of higher tariffs, can exert a significant negative drag on U.S.
See Dario Caldara, Matteo Iacoviello, Patrick Molligo, Andrea Prestipino, and Andrea Raffo (2019), "The Economic Effects of Trade Policy Uncertainty (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1256 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).
See Richard Clarida (2019), "The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some Implications for Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordination (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1244 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April).
Johannsen, and David Lopez-Salido (2016), "Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October).
Goldberg (2005), "Exchange Rate Pass-Through into Import Prices," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.
679–90; and Christopher Gust, Sylvain Leduc, and Robert Vigfusson (2010), "Trade Integration, Competition, and the Decline in Exchange-Rate Pass-Through," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
Diez, Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas, and Mikkel Plagborg-Møller (2019), "Dominant Currency Paradigm," NBER Working Paper Series 22943 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March).
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, October 30.

At "Gender and Career Progression" European Central Bank, Frankfurt, Germany
I want to thank our hosts, the European Central Bank, who put so much work into making this conference a success, as well as the conference organizers from all three sponsoring institutions—the ECB, Federal Reserve, and the Bank of England.
I also want to express my appreciation to the many researchers from universities and from other central banks, as well as the members of women's and minority committees of economics and finance associations from around the world, who are attending the conference in Frankfurt.
I found the conference program to be particularly interesting, and I look forward to Federal Reserve staff coming back to Washington to share what they learned from the research and discussions.
At the Federal Reserve, we greatly value this conference, not only for the interactions that our staff have while they are there, but also when they bring back what they learn and share it with our staff.
The topics of today's conference, including papers on the promotion of women, the role of culture and institutions, and the dynamics of publishing, conferences, and seminars, will all spur additional conversations and ideas for action among staff at the Federal Reserve.
In my view, central banks have a responsibility to be leaders in addressing diversity and inclusion, not only for our own institutions, but also because of our influence on the profession as a whole.
Part of the value of this conference is that we, as central banks, can promote the study of these issues and discuss concrete steps that we can take together to address them.
Certainly, we take diversity and inclusion issues to heart at the Federal Reserve.1 We believe that the best ideas, policies and, ultimately, service to the public are the result of diverse perspectives, and from a staff that reflects the rich diversity of our nation.
That includes efforts to bring greater diversity to the Board of Directors of our Federal Reserve Banks and Branches as well as to senior leadership in the Federal Reserve System.
Second, we have broadened our reach in recruiting to provide a more diverse range of applicants the opportunity to apply for positions at the Federal Reserve—through strengthening our connections to schools that serve diverse populations, hiring an outreach specialist for these communities, establishing a stronger presence at career fairs for diverse students, and hosting career events for students to promote jobs in economics and finance at the Federal Reserve.
Third, we are working with high schools and universities to inspire students' interest in economics and finance.
This last initiative has led to students developing an interest and pursuing careers in economics, including as research assistants at the Federal Reserve, and several are currently employed at the Board as research assistants.
Of course, these conferences are also an important part of addressing diversity and inclusion in central banking, and the economics and finance professions.
I look forward to welcoming all of you to Washington next fall to attend the third such conference, hosted by the Federal Reserve.
We hope these conferences will inspire further work on these important topics and will highlight the issues that researchers are addressing, and more broadly promote the conversations we are having in the economic and finance professions.
Thank you for your work, and I look forward to seeing you at the Federal Reserve next year.

Before we begin our conversation, I would like to share a few thoughts about the outlook for the U.S.
economy is in a good place, and the baseline outlook is favorable.
The median expectation from Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' most recent Summary of Economic Projections is for GDP growth to be around 2 percent in 2019, for growth to continue near this pace next year, and for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation to rise gradually to our symmetric 2 percent objective.2 The unemployment rate, at 3.5 percent, is at a half-century low, and wages are rising broadly in line with productivity growth and underlying inflation.
There is no evidence to date that a strong labor market is putting excessive cost-push pressure on price inflation.
economy confronts some evident risks in this the 11th year of economic expansion.
Global growth estimates continue to be marked down, and global disinflationary pressures cloud the outlook for U.S.
Over the 12 months through August, PCE inflation is running at 1.4 percent, and core PCE inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices, is running at 1.8 percent.
Turning now to monetary policy, at both its July and September meetings, the FOMC voted to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points.3 With these decisions, the current target range for the federal funds rate is 1.75 to 2 percent, which compares with the range of 2.25 to 2.5 percent that prevailed between December 2018 and July 2019.
The Committee took these actions to provide a somewhat more accommodative policy in response to muted inflation pressures and the risks to the outlook I mentioned earlier.
Looking ahead, monetary policy is not on a preset course, and the Committee will proceed on a meeting-by-meeting basis to assess the economic outlook as well as the risks to the outlook, and it will act as appropriate to sustain growth, a strong labor market, and a return of inflation to our symmetric 2 percent objective.
Turning now to the framework under which the Federal Reserve operates in financial markets, in September of this year, shocks in the repurchase agreement (repo) market put upward pressure on money market rates, and these pressures spilled over into the federal funds market.
In response to these developments, the Federal Reserve on September 17 initiated a program of repurchase operations to provide liquidity sufficient to keep the federal funds rate within the desired target range.
As the FOMC announced in January 2019, the Committee seeks to operate with a level of bank reserves that is sufficiently ample to ensure that control of the federal funds rate is achieved primarily by the setting of our administered rates and is not, over the longer term, reliant on frequent and large open market operations.4 In July, the FOMC concluded the program of balance sheet reduction in place since October 2017 and indicated then that, after a time, it would commence increasing its securities holdings to maintain reserves at a level consistent with an ample-reserves regime.
The FOMC announced on October 11 that it would seek to maintain, over time, a level of bank reserves at or somewhat above the level that prevailed in early September, a level that we believe is sufficient to operate an ample-reserves regime.5 This week, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York began a program of purchasing Treasury bills in the secondary market.
This program will continue at least into the second quarter of next year and is designed to achieve—and, over time, maintain—ample reserve balances at or above the level that prevailed in early September.
In addition, the Federal Reserve will continue to conduct term and overnight repo operations at least through January to ensure that the supply of reserves remains ample even during periods of temporary, but pronounced, increases in our nonreserve liabilities, and to mitigate the risk that money market pressures adversely affect monetary policy implementation.
It is important to note that the open market operations we have announced are technical, "Central Banking 101" operations and should not be conflated with the large-scale asset purchase programs that the Federal Reserve deployed after the financial crisis.
In those programs, the Federal Reserve was seeking to ease financial conditions by lowering term premiums via its purchases of long-term Treasury bonds and mortgage-backed securities.
The technical measures we are undertaking do not represent a change in the stance of monetary policy, which we continue to implement by adjusting the target range for the federal funds rate.
Finally, I would like to say a few words about the monetary policy framework review we are undertaking this year.
This review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications is the first of its kind for the Federal Reserve.
Public engagement, unprecedented in scope for the Fed, is an important part of this effort.
We will draw on these insights as we assess how best to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability in the most robust fashion possible.
We will continue reporting on our discussions in the meeting minutes and share our conclusions when we finish the review during the first half of next year.6
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
I am grateful to Brian Doyle of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.
The most recent Summary of Economic Projections is an addendum to the minutes of the September 2019 FOMC meeting.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 17–18, 2019," press release, October 9.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, July 31; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 18.
See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board's website.
See the Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation, which can be found on the Board's website.

At "Monetary Policy’s Impact on Workers and Their Communities," a Fed Listens event, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
Today's event is the last in our series of Fed Listens events held across the country to learn about how Americans think about monetary policy and how they think about the Federal Reserve.
Fed Listens is a new comprehensive outreach to the public on monetary policy.
For many decades there was a sense at the Board that the public wasn't interested or even willing to dive into the complexities of monetary policy.
That view has changed in a fundamental way, especially in the aftermath of the financial crisis when it was urgently important that the public understand what we were doing.
Since I became a Board member almost a year ago, it has become clear to me that people are not only willing to engage on complex economic issues, but they also want to know that their concerns are being taken into consideration on issues that affect their financial well-being.
When we communicate our views on the economic outlook and our expectations for where interest rates may be heading, consumers and businesses take that information into account when making decisions on spending, investment, and hiring.
For that reason, our policy communications are an important part of the Fed's toolkit for influencing the direction of the economy.
We have heard from many people from different parts of the country and from different sectors of the economy about how monetary policy affects them and their communities.
Hearing a broad range of perspectives on these issues will help us make good decisions as we consider new approaches to monetary policy.
I am eager to hear from our panelists how they think the labor market and our policies are impacting the communities they serve in Illinois, Michigan, and in other states in the Midwest.
As a former community banker, I am also very interested to hear from people who are implementing creative strategies to build wealth and support access to credit for low- and moderate-income communities.
The panelists in our second session can speak to their experiences doing just that, because they are helping to bring credit and housing opportunities to Appalachia, Indianapolis as well as right here in Chicago.
Our monetary policy review will have implications for financial markets, but we also want to know more about what the impact will be on Main Street.
My colleagues and I are keenly aware of our responsibility to focus on how the decisions we make affect the real economy for people in communities all across the country.
The two goals for monetary policy—maximum employment and stable prices—are determined by the Congress and are not subject to our framework review.
For example, inflation has run modestly below our 2 percent objective for many years.
Given that, it would be helpful to hear whether you think the Federal Open Market Committee should consider strategies that aim to have inflation exceed our target for a period of time to make up for the earlier shortfall or whether you think that would threaten the decades of success the Fed has had keeping the public's inflation expectations low and stable.
Another question concerns the Fed's existing toolkit for monetary policy.
Currently, our available policy tools include setting interest rates, purchasing longer-term assets, and forward guidance about the expected future path of policy.
Are there other tools we should consider to help us reach and sustain our objectives more effectively? I also want to know how the Federal Open Market Committee's communication of its policy framework might be improved.
Your perspectives on questions like these are a vital part of this monetary policy review.
Once the policy review is complete, we will share our findings with the public, probably during the first half of next year.

At a “Community Listening Session," a Fed Listens event at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri
I look forward to hearing the perspectives of the community and business leaders participating today.
The Reserve Banks and the Board have been holding Fed Listens events around the country as part of a comprehensive and public review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices.
Because Congress has granted the Federal Reserve significant protections from short-term political pressures, we have an obligation to clearly explain what we are doing and why.
We have invited you here because we want to better understand how monetary policy affects your lives and the lives of the people your organizations represent.
We want to hear your perspective on maximum employment and price stability—the monetary policy goals Congress has assigned us.
Unemployment is at a half-century low, and inflation is running close to, but a bit below, our 2 percent objective.
While not everyone fully shares economic opportunities and the economy faces some risks, overall, it is—as I like to say—in a good place.
While we believe our strategy and tools have been and remain effective, the U.S.
economy, like other advanced economies around the world, is facing some longer-term challenges—from low growth, low inflation, and low interest rates.
While slow growth is obviously not good, you may be asking, "What's wrong with low inflation and low interest rates?" Low can be good, but when inflation—and, consequently, interest rates—are too low, the Fed and other central banks have less room to cut rates to support the economy during downturns.
Doing so would help prevent inflation expectations among consumers, businesses, and investors from slipping too low, as they appear to have done in several advanced economies.
More-firmly anchored expectations, in a virtuous circle, would help keep actual inflation around our target, thus preserving our ability to change interest rates as appropriate to meet our mandate.
We are also looking at whether our existing monetary policy tools will be adequate when the next downturn comes.
At the July meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, my colleagues and I began discussing what we have learned so far from the Fed Listens events.
Employers are partnering with community colleges and nonprofit organizations to offer training.

At the Fed, we like to say that monetary policy is data dependent.
We say this to emphasize that policy is never on a preset course and will change as appropriate in response to incoming information.
From its beginnings more than a century ago, the Federal Reserve has gone to great lengths to collect and rigorously analyze the best information to make sound decisions for the public we serve.
We must sort out in real time, as best we can, what the profound changes underway in the economy mean for issues such as the functioning of labor markets, the pace of productivity growth, and the forces driving inflation.
Indeed, 100 years ago, some of the first Fed policymakers recognized the need for more timely information on the rapidly evolving state of industry and decided to create and publish production indexes for the United States.
I will then turn to three challenges our dynamic economy is posing for policy at present: First, what would the consequences of a sharp rise in the price of oil be for the U.S.
Second, with terabytes of data increasingly competing with truckloads of goods in economic importance, what are the best ways to measure output and productivity? Put more provocatively, might the recent productivity slowdown be an artifact of antiquated measurement?
Third, how tight is the labor market? Given our mandate of maximum employment and price stability, this question is at the very core of our work.
But answering it in real time in a dynamic economy as jobs are gained in one area but lost in others is remarkably challenging.
In August, the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) announced that job gains over the year through March were likely a half-million lower than previously reported.
I will discuss how we are using big data to improve our grasp of the job market in the face of such revisions.
These three quite varied questions highlight the broad range of issues that currently come under the simple heading "data dependent." After exploring them, I will comment briefly on recent developments in money markets and on monetary policy.
World War I was breaking out in Europe, and over the next four years the war would fuel profound growth and transformation in the U.S.
In need of more timely information, the Fed began creating and publishing a series of industrial output reports that soon evolved into industrial production indexes.2 The indexes initially comprised 22 basic commodities, chosen in part because they covered the major industrial groups, but also for the practical reason that data were available with less than a one-month lag.
Over the century of its existence, our industrial production team has remained at the frontier of economic measurement, using the most advanced techniques to monitor U.S.
By 2005, production was at about the same level as it had been 50 years earlier.
Since then, remarkable advances in the technology for finding and extracting oil have led to a rapid increase in production to levels higher than ever before.3 In 2018, the United States became the world's largest oil producer.4 Oil exports have surged, imports have fallen (figure 2), and the U.S.
Energy Information Administration projects that this month, for the first time in many decades, the United States will be a net exporter of oil.5
As monetary policymakers, we closely monitor developments in oil markets because disruptions in these markets have played a role in several U.S.
recessions and in the Great Inflation of the 1960s and 1970s.
Traditionally, we assessed that a sharp rise in the price of oil would have a strong negative effect on consumers and businesses and, hence, on the U.S.
Today a higher oil price would still cause dislocations and hardship for many, but with exports and imports nearly balanced, the higher price paid by consumers is roughly offset by higher earnings of workers and firms in the U.S.
Moreover, because it is now easier to ramp up oil production, a sustained price rise can quickly boost output, providing a shock absorber in the face of supply disruptions.
Thus, setting aside the effects of geopolitical uncertainty that may accompany higher oil prices, we now judge that a price spike would likely have nearly offsetting effects on U.S.
Measuring the overall level of goods and services produced in the economy is fundamentally messier, because it requires adding apples and oranges—and automobiles and myriad other goods and services.
Periods of rapid change present particular challenges, and it can take time for the measurement system to adapt to fully and accurately reflect the changes in the economy.
In 1987, Nobel Prize–winning economist Robert Solow quipped that "you can see the computer age everywhere but in the productivity statistics."6 In the second half of the 1990s, this measurement puzzle was at the heart of monetary policymaking.7 Chairman Alan Greenspan famously argued that the United States was experiencing the dawn of a new economy, and that potential and actual output were likely understated in official statistics.
Where others saw capacity constraints and incipient inflation, Greenspan saw a productivity boom that would leave room for very low unemployment without inflation pressures.
In light of the uncertainty it faced, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judged that the appropriate risk‑management approach called for refraining from interest rate increases unless and until there were clearer signs of rising inflation.
Under this policy, unemployment fell near record lows without rising inflation, and later revisions to GDP measurement showed appreciably faster productivity growth.8
This episode illustrates a key challenge to making data-dependent policy in real time: Good decisions require good data, but the data in hand are seldom as good as we would like.
Sound decisionmaking therefore requires the application of good judgment and a healthy dose of risk management.
Official statistics currently show productivity growth slowing significantly in recent years, with the growth in output per hour worked falling from more than 3 percent a year from 1995 to 2003 to less than half that pace since then.9 Analysts are actively debating three alternative explanations for this apparent slowdown: First, the slowdown may be real and may persist indefinitely as productivity growth returns to more‑normal levels after a brief golden age.10 Second, the slowdown may instead be a pause of the sort that often accompanies fundamental technological change, so that productivity gains from recent technology advances will appear over time as society adjusts.11 Third, the slowdown may be overstated, perhaps greatly, because of measurement issues akin to those at work in the 1990s.12 At this point, we cannot know which of these views may gain widespread acceptance, and monetary policy will play no significant role in how this puzzle is resolved.
Moreover, productivity growth seems to have moved up over the past year after a long period at very low levels; we do not know whether that welcome trend will be sustained.
Recent research suggests that current official statistics may understate productivity growth by missing a significant part of the growing value we derive from fast internet connections and smartphones.
Researchers have tried to answer these questions in various ways.13 For example, Fed researchers have recently proposed a novel approach to measuring the value of services consumers derive from cellphones and other devices based on the volume of data flowing over those connections.14 Taking their accounting at face value, GDP growth would have been about 1/2 percentage point higher since 2007, which is an appreciable change and would be very good news.
Growth over the previous couple of decades would also have been about 1/4 percentage point higher as well, implying that measurement issues of this sort likely account for only part of the productivity slowdown in current statistics.
Let me now turn from the measurement issues raised by the information age to an issue that has long been at the center of monetary policymaking: How tight is the labor market? Answering this question is central to our outlook for both of our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability.
Until recently, the official data showed job gains over the year through March 2019 of about 210,000 a month, which is far higher than necessary to absorb new entrants into the labor force and thus hold the unemployment rate constant.
The pace of job gains is hard to pin down in real time largely because of the dynamism of our economy: Many new businesses open and others close every month, creating some jobs and ending others, and definitive data on this turnover arrive with a substantial lag.
Several years ago, we began a collaboration with the payroll processing firm ADP to construct a measure of payroll employment from their data set, which covers about 20 percent of the nation's private workforce and is available to us with a roughly one-week delay.15 As described in a recent research paper, we constructed a measure that provides an independent read on payroll employment that complements the official statistics.16 While experience is still limited with the new measure, we find promising evidence that it can refine our real-time picture of job gains.
For example, in the first eight months of 2008, as the Great Recession was getting underway, the official monthly employment data showed total job losses of about 750,000 (figure 4).
We believe that the new measure may help us better understand job market conditions in real time.
The preview of the BLS benchmark revision leaves average job gains over the year through March solidly above the pace required to accommodate growth in the workforce over that time, but where we had seen a booming job market, we now see more-moderate growth.
Based on a range of data and analysis, including our new measure, we now judge that, even allowing for such a revision, job gains remain above the level required to provide jobs for new entrants to the jobs market over time.
Of course, the pace of job gains is only one of many job market issues that figure into our assessment of how the economy is performing relative to our maximum-employment mandate and our assessment of any inflationary pressures arising in the job market.
In summary, data dependence is, and always has been, at the heart of policymaking at the Federal Reserve.
We are always seeking out new and better sources of information and refining our analysis of that information to keep us abreast of conditions as our economy constantly reinvents itself.
Before wrapping up, I will discuss recent developments in money markets and the current stance of monetary policy.
Our influence on the financial conditions that affect employment and inflation is indirect.
The Federal Reserve sets two overnight interest rates: the interest rate paid on banks' reserve balances and the rate on our reverse repurchase agreements.
We use these two administered rates to keep a market-determined rate, the federal funds rate, within a target range set by the FOMC.
In mid-September, an important channel in the transmission process—wholesale funding markets—exhibited unexpectedly intense volatility.
Payments to meet corporate tax obligations and to purchase Treasury securities triggered notable liquidity pressures in money markets.
Overnight interest rates spiked, and the effective federal funds rate briefly moved above the FOMC's target range.
To counter these pressures, we began conducting temporary open market operations.
These operations have kept the federal funds rate in the target range and alleviated money market strains more generally.
While a range of factors may have contributed to these developments, it is clear that without a sufficient quantity of reserves in the banking system, even routine increases in funding pressures can lead to outsized movements in money market interest rates.
This volatility can impede the effective implementation of monetary policy, and we are addressing it.
Consistent with a decision we made in January, our goal is to provide an ample supply of reserves to ensure that control of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates is exercised primarily by setting our administered rates and not through frequent market interventions.
Of course, we will not hesitate to conduct temporary operations if needed to foster trading in the federal funds market at rates within the target range.
Reserve balances are one among several items on the liability side of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, and demand for these liabilities—notably, currency in circulation—grows over time.
Hence, increasing the supply of reserves or even maintaining a given level over time requires us to increase the size of our balance sheet.
As we indicated in our March statement on balance sheet normalization, at some point, we will begin increasing our securities holdings to maintain an appropriate level of reserves.18 That time is now upon us.
I want to emphasize that growth of our balance sheet for reserve management purposes should in no way be confused with the large-scale asset purchase programs that we deployed after the financial crisis.
Neither the recent technical issues nor the purchases of Treasury bills we are contemplating to resolve them should materially affect the stance of monetary policy, to which I now turn.
Our goal in monetary policy is to promote maximum employment and stable prices, which we interpret as inflation running closely around our symmetric 2 percent objective.
Many indicators show a historically strong labor market, with solid job gains, the unemployment rate at half-century lows, and rising prime-age labor force participation.
Inflation is somewhat below our symmetric 2 percent objective but has been gradually firming over the past few months.
FOMC participants continue to see a sustained expansion of economic activity, strong labor market conditions, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective as most likely.
But there are risks to this favorable outlook, principally from global developments.
Growth around much of the world has weakened over the past year and a half, and uncertainties around trade, Brexit, and other issues pose risks to the outlook.
As those factors have evolved, my colleagues and I have shifted our views about appropriate monetary policy toward a lower path for the federal funds rate and have lowered its target range by 50 basis points.
We believe that our policy actions are providing support for the outlook.
Taking all that into account, we will act as appropriate to support continued growth, a strong job market, and inflation moving back to our symmetric 2 percent objective.
"Using Massive Online Choice Experiments to Measure Changes in Well-Being," Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, vol.
"Introduction of Quarterly Birth/Death Model Updates in the Establishment Survey," Current Employment Statistics, August 28.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June.
"Improving the Accuracy of Economic Measurement with Multiple Data Sources: The Case of Payroll Employment Data (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-065.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.
"Unraveling the Oil Conundrum: Productivity Improvements and Cost Declines in the U.S.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 22.
"Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession," in Jonathan A.
"Is Slow Productivity and Output Growth in Advanced Economies the New Normal?" International Productivity Monitor, no.
"Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23–25.
Economy in World War I," NBER Working Paper Series 10580.
Hydraulic Fracturing for Oil and Gas: Impacts from the Hydraulic Fracturing Water Cycle on Drinking Water Resources in the United States, final report.
The Energy Information Administration's Short-Term Energy Outlook (STEO; available at https://www.eia.gov/outlooks/steo), released on September 10, 2019, shows that the United States will become a net exporter of crude oil and liquid fuels by October 2019.
Revision and the role of high tech is described in Seskin (1999) and Jorgenson, Ho, and Stiroh (2008).
Between 1995 and 2003, business-sector output per hour increased at an annual rate of 3.4 percent, and it has risen only 1.4 percent since then.
See the Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans, which are available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190320c.htm.


At the premiere of "Marriner Eccles: Father of the Modern Federal Reserve," Salt Lake City, Utah
It is a great pleasure to join you all this morning for the premiere of KUED's documentary Marriner Eccles: Father of the Modern Federal Reserve.
Randy was fortunate to marry Hope, and he has a second Federal Reserve connection.
As the Depression deepened, he presciently recognized that the federal government should act forcefully to put people back to work and stimulate business.
In a speech delivered here in Utah in 1932, Marriner asked what was the purpose of an economic system if not to allow those willing and able to work the opportunity to do so, to "guarantee to them sustenance for their families and protection against want and destitution."1 His ideas helped form the basis of Franklin D.
After World War II, he recognized, again presciently, that high inflation, not contraction, posed the principal threat to the U.S.
And, perhaps most importantly from my perspective as Fed Chair, he is responsible more than any other person for the fact that the United States today has an independent central bank—a central bank able to make decisions in the long-term best interest of the economy, without regard to the political pressures of the moment.
During his years on the Fed Board, Marriner played a crucial role in two landmark accomplishments that established the modern Federal Reserve—the Banking Act of 1935, near the start of his tenure at the Fed, and the Federal Reserve-Treasury Accord of 1951, at the end.
The result was the Banking Act of 1935, which significantly strengthened the structural independence of the Federal Reserve.
During World War II, the Fed effectively ceded control of monetary policy to the Treasury Department by agreeing to maintain a low interest rate peg on government bonds.
The low rates helped the government finance the war, but after the war ended, inflation soared.
The Federal Reserve-Treasury Accord of that year separated government debt management from monetary policy and freed the Fed to combat high inflation and set short-term interest rates based on what was best for the economy.
In closing, I leave you with this statement from Marriner, inscribed on a plaque in the Eccles Building: "The management of the central bank must be absolutely free from the dangers of control by politics and by private interests, singly or combined."

At "Perspectives on Maximum Employment and Price Stability" a Fed Listens event sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C.
Welcome to the room where members of the Board of Governors and the presidents of the 12 Reserve Banks meet eight times a year—most recently, two weeks ago—to decide the stance of monetary policy.
And, through the decades, our Federal Reserve predecessors grappled with financial turmoil and the economy's ups and downs.
The Reserve Banks and the Board have been holding Fed Listens events around the country as part of a comprehensive and public review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices.
Because Congress has granted the Federal Reserve significant protections from short-term political pressures, we have an obligation to clearly explain what we are doing and why.
We've invited you here because we want to better understand how monetary policy affects the lives of the people your organizations represent—union members, small business owners, residents of low- and moderate-income communities, retirees, and others.
We want to hear your perspective on maximum employment and price stability—the monetary policy goals Congress has assigned us.
Unemployment is near a half-century low, and inflation is running close to, but a bit below, our 2 percent objective.
While not everyone fully shares economic opportunities and the economy faces some risks, overall it is—as I like to say—in a good place.
While we believe our strategy and tools have been and remain effective, the U.S.
economy, like other advanced economies around the world, is facing some longer-term challenges—from low growth, low inflation, and low interest rates.
While slow growth is obviously not good, you may be asking, "What's wrong with low inflation and low interest rates?" Low can be good, but when inflation—and, consequently, interest rates—are too low, the Fed and other central banks have less room to cut rates to support the economy during downturns.
Doing so would help prevent inflation expectations among consumers, businesses, and investors from slipping too low, as they appear to have done in several advanced economies.
More-firmly anchored expectations, in a virtuous circle, would help keep actual inflation around our target, thus preserving our ability to change interest rates as appropriate to meet our mandate.
We are also looking at whether our existing monetary policy tools will be adequate when the next downturn comes.
At the July meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee, my colleagues and I began discussing what we've learned so far from the Fed Listens events.
Employers are partnering with community colleges and nonprofit organizations to offer training.

The Financial Stability Board at 10 Years—Looking Back and Looking Ahead
Vice Chair for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K.
The European Banking Federation is often referred to as the voice of Europe's banks, and I am here in the hopes that you are the ears of those institutions as well.
This year, 2019, is the 10th anniversary of the founding of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which means it has also been 10 years since some of the darker days of the global financial crisis.
Today, I would like to take on the role of Janus.
I would like to look back on the experiences of the past 10 years, what the FSB has accomplished, and also offer some perspective on just how it contributed to the construction of the post-crisis global financial architecture.
As you would expect, I believe the FSB has and will continue to play an important role in our global financial system.
I would then like to look ahead to the new challenges facing the global regulatory community, such as innovations in financial technology, shifts in financial globalization and integration, and increasing nonbank financial intermediation.
The regulatory community knew it must work to regain the confidence of financial institutions, market participants, and the broader public.
They knew that then-existing arrangements for international cooperation were not up to that task.
The Financial Stability Forum (FSF), the predecessor of the FSB, had been founded by the G7 countries in 1999 after a series of financial crises in the latter part of the 1990s.
The group was intended to enhance cooperation among various national and international supervisory bodies and multilateral financial institutions in order to promote stability in the international financial system.
While the group discussed matters related to financial stability, the areas it was asked to study were relatively narrow, and combined with its limited membership, it had relatively little scope to promote regulatory reform.
The looseness of this arrangement represented the prevailing view in advanced nations at the time that national regulators and finance ministries were capable of monitoring and dealing with risks to global financial stability.
On the one hand, these nations had long recognized that effective capital regulation of banks with a global footprint was only possible with coordination on minimal capital standards—the Basel Committee process.
But there was no such consensus about financial stability, perhaps rooted in a belief, rarely expressed but widespread, that a severe global financial crisis was highly unlikely, and that traditional prudential supervision would be enough to prevent it.
Major banks in Europe, Japan, and the United States had been affected by debt crises in developing countries in the 1980s and 1990s, but these crises had never seriously threatened advanced economies.
In the fall of 2008, G20 leaders recognized that the severity of the emerging global financial crisis required a response that was beyond the capabilities of the FSF.
Specifically, they recognized there was a major deficiency in the FSF that prevented it from being very effective in establishing international financial regulatory standards.
The FSF was narrow—geographically, in the number of governments, and substantively, in the range of ministries, central banks, and important regulatory agencies that were not members.
As of 2009, only 58 percent of global gross domestic product (GDP) was represented, compared to 83 percent of GDP under the FSB today.
The issue of representation was crucial, because the financial crisis required a fully global response.
As a result, in April of 2009 at the G20 summit in London, the heads of state and government called for an organization "with a stronger institutional basis and enhanced capacity" that would allow them to achieve "much greater consistency and systematic cooperation between countries…that a global financial system requires." Behind those simple words was a sea change in the willingness of advanced nations to tackle significant coordination on financial regulation.
With the creation of the FSB, the G20 designed a new regulatory organization with global reach dedicated to advancing and coordinating a newly embraced priority for the global economy—far-reaching reform of financial regulation and supervision.
The FSB membership spans central banks, ministries of finance, supervisors of financial institutions, international financial organizations, and market regulators.
It has a broad mandate centered on financial stability and coordination of responses for those most challenging issues that cut across the traditional mandates of other global standard-setting bodies.
The exigency of the crisis helped overcome longstanding deficiencies in the structure of the FSF, rooted in differences between the members or ambivalence about international standard setting itself, related to financial stability.
In addition to those actions, the members also recognized that work must begin immediately to develop new regulatory standards for capital and liquidity, derivatives reform, and issues stemming from the nonbanking sector which would require some time for data gathering and extensive public consultation.
Creation of the FSB was one of a number of steps taken at the international level in the spring of 2009 that over the subsequent months helped restore confidence in the banking system and begin the process of recovery.
Since the FSB was born with the global economy and financial markets still in turmoil, immediate attention was needed in a number of core areas: over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives, prudential bank standards, resolution, and nonbank finance.
Much of the FSB's first 10 years has been focused on these issues, and a great deal has been accomplished, resulting in a significantly strengthened and more resilient global financial system.
The elements of the FSB's agenda for OTC derivatives fall into four categories: 1) central clearing of standardized OTC derivatives, where appropriate, 2) exchange or electronic platform trading of standardized OTC derivatives, 3) reporting to trade repositories, and 4) higher capital and margin requirements for non-centrally cleared derivatives.
The main elements of Basel III are: a stronger risk-based capital adequacy framework; a leverage ratio requirement; a capital surcharge for global systemically important banks; a liquidity coverage ratio liquidity requirement; a net stable funding ratio liquidity requirement; and a large exposures framework.
All 24 member jurisdictions of the FSB have the core elements of Basel III risk-based capital and liquidity measures in place.
We have some work left to do but I am confident that it will be completed, and the FSB will continue to push all of its members for full completion of these important measures.
One of the most important issues the world faced during the financial crisis was the "too-big-to-fail" dilemma.
In response, the FSB established the "Key Attributes for Effective Resolution," which identify the responsibilities, instruments, and powers that national resolution regimes should follow if they have to resolve a failing systemically important financial institution or SIFI.
During the crisis, "shadow banking" became the term for any type of financial activity that occurred outside banks that resembled what banks did and that often wasn't completely understood.
Regardless of its name, a lot of blame for the problems that arose in the global financial crisis centered on risks that emerged from some activities in parts of this sector, and one of the FSB's first jobs was to try to look into these activities to better understand their growing role in financial markets.
Among the important steps we took was a global monitoring exercise that results in an annual report on the size of NBFI in the global economy.
That work actually goes beyond the membership of the FSB, since a number of important international financial centers also report information to us.
More important, we are now able to more carefully categorize activities in the nonbank sector in order to analyze potential vulnerabilities.
In addition to monitoring, we have made a number of other recommendations and are working with fellow global standard setters to implement them.
For example, we are working with the International Association of Insurance Supervisors on capital standards for global insurers, and we are working with the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) on liquidity and leverage in the funds industry.
The result of 10 years of policy development by the FSB and implementation at the national level has been a stronger, more resilient global financial system.
Large banks are better capitalized, less levered, and more liquid.
Consequently, the FSB has started to pivot from policy development to evaluating the effectiveness of the reforms it has advocated.
Casting my gaze backward, there is much to be proud of in the last decade, success that is reflected in the strength and stability of the global financial system.
The global financial system is constantly evolving, influenced in part by past experience, and by regulation.
As I look ahead, I think we must consider whether the ways in which we responded to the financial crisis may not be the most appropriate ones to address the challenges and ongoing changes in the financial system that we currently face.
This year the FSB has embarked on an important project to review and update its financial stability surveillance framework.
In addition, we are looking at how we communicate our understanding of the state of the financial system to the G20 and to the world.
As I look forward and ponder the forces that are shaping the evolution of the global financial system, the FSB is currently grappling with two issues—financial innovation and market fragmentation—that have the potential to profoundly affect financial stability, so let me start there.
The report was careful to note the potential benefits of many of these innovations, including the possibility of greater financial inclusion and increased speed of financial transactions.
However, the report also drew attention to several supervisory and regulatory issues, including three priorities where international collaboration is critical: managing operational risk from third-party service providers, mitigating cyber risks, and monitoring macrofinancial risks that could emerge as fintech activities increase.1
These are a type of crypto-asset that attempts to address the volatility of some crypto-assets by tying their value to conventional assets, such as the value of the U.S.
At the FSB, we undertake regular monitoring of the financial stability implications of crypto-assets, and we have had discussions about the regulatory and supervisory approaches to crypto-assets and potential gaps in regulation.
The introduction of stablecoins, however, brings a potentially new scale and scope that the financial regulatory community must carefully consider.
Although there is a small risk to financial stability today, there is no doubt the potential scale of stablecoins and other crypto-assets yet to emerge may pose regulatory challenges.
We have already begun work to identify which regulations exist that apply to stablecoins in our jurisdictions, and once that assessment is complete, we will report to the G20 on any appropriate actions that need to be taken to ensure that financial stability is not negatively affected by their introduction.
As time has passed since the financial crisis, there is concern about fragmentation of financial markets—a sense that globalization of financial markets may be slowing and differences in the regulatory requirements at the national level may be on the rise.
Some forms of market fragmentation may have financial stability benefits, such as reasonable loss absorbency requirements imposed on subsidiaries of global banks, but market fragmentation may also bring about unintended negative consequences, such as increased opportunities for regulatory arbitrage and cumulatively higher regulatory burdens for firms.
Over the past year, at the request of the G20, the FSB has been examining the different forms in which market fragmentation is manifest.
Following up on that, we recently held a workshop where FSB members met with representatives from the private sector and from academia to discuss the internal allocation of capital and liquidity by global financial institutions.2 We are also following up in other areas, such as working with IOSCO on issues related to deference and examining improved ways for regulatory and supervisory information sharing.
Market fragmentation is an issue that will never disappear, and we will remain vigilant to ensure that it does not pose a threat to financial stability.
Janus was also the god of transitions, which makes him doubly appropriate for the FSB at this time, because we find ourselves in transition from a time when we were largely focused on addressing the effects and the lessons of the financial crisis.
We now find ourselves with increasingly focused energy on looking forward, with both a strong organization that has been tested through an intense period of policy formulation and implementation and a strong global financial system resulting from those efforts.
I hope that 10 years from now, a successor of mine as FSB Chair can point to 10 more years of success in flexibly and adeptly responding to all that the global financial system throws at us.
Quarles, "Government of Union: Achieving Certainty in Cross-Border Finance" (speech at the Financial Stability Board Workshop, Philadelphia, PA, September 26, 2019).

At "Community Banking in the 21st Century" 2019 Community Banking Research and Policy Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, St.
It is a special honor for me to be part of this conference and its tradition of advancing our understanding of how banking shapes our economy and our communities.1 As a community banker, I sought out actionable research that I could leverage to better serve my customers and my community.
As a state bank regulator, I conducted my own research to answer questions about issues affecting the banks my agency regulated.
Today I am honored to be here as the first person to serve on the Federal Reserve Board in the role that the Congress designated for someone with community banking or state supervisory experience.
My work at the Board has given me an even greater appreciation for how creative, insightful research informs and shapes policy decisions that support our economy.
More than 10 years on, as the entire banking industry continues to evolve post-crisis, I would like to share with you some of my thoughts and observations on the forces influencing the future of banking, and community banking in particular.
I will also suggest some areas where policymakers could use the help of researchers, bankers, and state supervisors to better understand how community banking is changing and how we can better provide a path for the continued viability of this sector and its business model.
I hardly need to tell this audience that community banks play a vital role in the financial services industry and in the economy.
From my perspective, the Federal Reserve supports community banks as a central component of a strong, resilient, and stable financial system.
Our system is made more resilient through a broad and varied range of institutions serving different types of customers, with community banks providing access to credit and other financial services in towns and cities across America.
With the support of community bankers, these investments are the building blocks of a strong community and help support a vibrant economy across the country—from here in the Midwest to the coasts on either side.
Research on community banking and the accessibility of financial services is incredibly important.
Community bankers and policymakers want to better understand how technology, competition, regulation, and other factors are driving decision making, consolidation, and the other challenges and opportunities that are shaping community banking.
The lack of a full understanding of these institutions, their functionality, and their needs may limit our ability to identify important areas of focus for research.
If you are a community banker, are involved in economic development or city or county management, or live in a community served by a community bank, your own experiences likely provide anecdotal evidence regarding the answers to these questions, but research can provide more comprehensive and systematic evidence, leading to more definitive answers.
Community banks provide a variety of benefits to their communities, but these benefits can be difficult to quantify and measure.
Therefore, economists and policymakers would like to be able to define and understand the full economic effects of a community bank in an area that relies on it and identify the different channels by which a community bank finances spending, investment, economic development, and job creation.
In addition, what happens to a community when a bank headquartered or chartered in that community is acquired by a financial institution located elsewhere? Can we calculate the cumulative contribution of community banks to U.S.
investment, employment, and economic output? I hope that presentations at future community banking research conferences can help answer some of these questions and provide a stronger foundation for policy development.
While community banks face considerable challenges, in general they have emerged from the last decade as strong competitors: On average, they have grown somewhat larger and have expanded their geographic footprints.
In other words, we have a more resilient, stronger community banking sector, but one with fewer locally headquartered banks.
As seen in figure 1, it is true that there are now many fewer small community banks—those with less than $250 million in assets—than there were in 2011.2 At the same time, the numbers of both large community banks and banks over $10 billion in assets (non-community banks) haven't changed much.
What do we find when we dig a little deeper? As shown in figure 2, very few small community banks failed or were liquidated in the past eight years—just over 100 banks, or 2 percent, of the total number in this size category as of 2011.
And over this time, just over one-fourth of the smallest community banks, nearly 1,200 of them, were acquired by other banks.
A fair share of those acquired banks—one in five—were acquired by another bank within the same holding company (figure 3).
You could consider that more of a reorganization at the holding company level rather than an acquisition by a competitor.
The remaining banks—20 percent of the smallest banks operating in 2011—were acquired by another financial institution.
Seventeen of the acquisitions, about one and a half percent, were acquisitions of a small community bank by a credit union, while 14, just over one percent, involved a non-community bank acquirer with over $10 billion in assets.
In other words, approximately four out of five of the small banks that were acquired during this period, or about 930 banks, were acquired by another community bank.3
To better understand what is happening with these institutions, we looked at several potential differences between small community banks that have been acquired and those that were not.
Was it the smallest community banks, or those with the smallest markets, that were most likely to be acquired? It turns out that the key difference between these banks was not their geographic reach or their size, but rather their profitability.
We find that small banks that were acquired by another institution were, on average, about the same size and geographic scope as other small banks but they were less profitable.
This fact challenges the notion held by some that small scale or operating in a very limited geographic area is a disadvantage and it shows that many small, locally focused banks are performing well in a changing and challenging marketplace.
Bank regulators should understand how the evolving structure of community banking has affected customers and how regulations can be tailored to limit the extent to which consolidation is driven by unnecessary, ineffective, or excessive regulatory burden.
Earlier research has shown that technological change and the removal of regulatory restrictions on interstate banking in the 1980s and 1990s have played important roles in driving consolidation.4
We can gain more insight into the factors that underlie changes in community banking by asking community bankers.
My former colleagues at the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) have done that in their community bank survey and the companion "Five Questions for Five Bankers" interviews.5
The 2018 survey shows that among banks indicating that they had received and seriously considered accepting an acquisition offer from another institution during the previous 12 months, a large majority say the cost of regulations or the lack of economies of scale at their current size are "important" or "very important" in their decision to consider the offer.
The survey did not ask which factor bankers consider most important, and there are many possible reasons a bank would consider selling.
What about those who made an offer to buy another bank during the past year? A majority, 8 out of 10, cite economies of scale as a factor in making an acquisition offer.
Other common motivations include the desire to enter a new market, the ability to exploit underutilized potential at the target institution and the desire to expand within an existing market.
I find these results very encouraging, reflecting an industry that believes in the future of community banking and is taking steps to invest in that future.
While it was not addressed in this part of the survey, it seems to me that the cost of regulation could have been a factor in making acquisition offers, possibly based on the theory that there could be efficiency gains by spreading fixed regulatory costs over a larger firm.
It is possible these savings may have been a factor for the roughly 80 percent who cited "economies of scale." More detailed questions in future surveys could provide firmer evidence about the effect of regulatory costs on decisions related to consolidation.
The "Five Questions for Five Bankers" initiative provides many additional insights into the forces driving change in community banking.
I find this initiative particularly valuable, because it is conducted by state banking commissioners who I know from my experience have deep insights into conditions in their states.
Last year, 28 commissioners conducted structured interviews with a small number of community bankers in their states.
The results show that bank consolidation is widely viewed as a trend that will continue into the future.
Bankers from many states cited regulatory burden or compliance costs as major factors driving consolidation.
Other frequently mentioned motives for consolidation were the costs of keeping up with technological change and the need to scale up in order to compete in a technology-focused landscape and with non-bank fintech firms in some service areas.
The Five Questions interviews provide a wealth of anecdotes about industry trends, and I would encourage researchers to consider utilizing the detailed interview approach in exploring the causes and effects of community bank consolidation.
It is important to point out that many of the changes to community banking through consolidation that I have described, in a general sense, are a natural and often desirable consequence of competition in a vibrant market economy.
This isn't news to community bankers or to community banking researchers.
It is not news to many people who live in small towns or urban areas who have lost access to community banks with deep roots in the community.
Acquiring banks need to consider that when you purchase a community bank and enter into a new market, along with the new customers and opportunities come a responsibility to be a part of and to support that community.
That is why I believe it is critical that we work together to find ways to preserve the benefits provided to communities by well-managed, strong financial institutions that are deeply grounded in the areas they serve—including the communities that they expand or merge into.
Now let's consider how the changes I have described in the banking industry have affected the benefits provided to local communities across the United States.
One might expect that the decline in the number of banks over the past few decades would mean communities would see fewer banks operating within the average local banking market.
In fact, when viewing the data in a national perspective, the number of banks per local market has been quite stable over time in both urban and rural areas.
First, many bank mergers combine firms that do not operate in the same local area, so they don't reduce the number of competitors in any market.
Second, many banks continue to expand their geographic scope by opening branches in new markets, leading to an increase in the number of banks in those local areas that offsets the decline from bank mergers in the same market.
Of course, stability in the average number of banks across a large number of markets does not imply stability locally within each market.
And even if the number of banks in a community does not change, there is a difference for customers and communities between a branch of a bank with numerous locations and the headquarters of a bank that is strongly rooted in a community.
For example, does bank consolidation influence the availability of credit to local small businesses?
The effect of a merger on small business lending depends on a number of factors, including the size of the merging banks, whether the acquirer is focused on small business lending, and the response of other local banks to the merger.6 Studies have also shown that the post-merger bank tends to be healthier than the target institution was before the merger, which could to lead to an increase in the availability of credit in the community.7 The bottom line is that some studies find small business lending goes up after mergers, and others find it goes down.
One very clear trend in the United States is a decline in the number of bank headquarters.
Acquisitions have resulted in the conversion of many bank headquarters into new branches of the acquiring institution.
Bank executives and staff who serve on the local chamber of commerce or on the boards of local hospitals or nonprofits may move to the new headquarters location, creating a leadership void in their old hometown.
We turned to Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) performance evaluations in the hope that they would offer some insights into local involvement by banks.
Because certain institutions are subject to community development tests, their performance evaluations include information on the bank's qualifying loans, investments (including donations) and services, grants, and certain community service activities.8
Comparing performance evaluations from CRA exam reports before and after an acquisition can provide some limited, case-specific evidence on the potential consequences of the loss of a bank headquarters.
Several examples from the past decade show that local donations and community service activity decline in communities that lost a bank headquarters following a merger.
Other notable activities included in-kind donations of real estate to Habitat for Humanity and monetary contributions to food pantries, Meals on Wheels, and Big Brothers Big Sisters of America.
Bank officers and employees also donated significant time to community service including through financial education to LMI individuals, mentoring programs, and service on the boards of local housing development agencies.
More research into the effects of losing a bank headquarters could help determine whether these examples are isolated or a predictable result of consolidation.
In closing, let me return to the question of what we know and what we would like to know.
We do not know if and to what extent other factors—such as achieving a desired level of economies of scale, for example—have been driving consolidation.
We have recently seen a rising number of acquisitions by credit unions, and we do not fully understand the implications of this trend, which seems likely to continue to accelerate.
We know that profitability is a more important factor in predicting acquisitions than bank size or geographic area, but more research on why some smaller banks are more profitable than others could be valuable.
We know from the CSBS surveys that regulatory costs are motivating banks that are considering selling or merging, and we could learn more about what is motivating buyers.
One factor is the vital leadership and supporting role many small banks play in their communities.
Communities need leaders and institutions that are deeply rooted in their cities, towns, and rural areas.
Finally, it is important that we understand why so few new banks have been created.
Are asset thresholds too high? Are regulations too burdensome? Or have low interest rates meant that net interest rate margins are just too narrow? Understanding the lack of new bank formation is as important as understanding the extent of consolidation and competition.
That was one of my goals, because I am confident that as researchers you have the skills and creativity to focus on the best questions and find the most insightful answers.
"Bank Consolidation and Small Business Lending: The Role of Community Banks," Journal of Financial Services Research, vol.
"The Effects of Bank Mergers and Acquisitions on Small Business Lending," Journal of Financial Economics, vol.
"Why Do Banks Merge?" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Community Bank Mergers and Their Impact on Small Business Lending," Journal of Financial Stability, vol.
"Bank Consolidation and Small Business Lending: It's Not Just Bank Size That Matters," Journal of Banking and Finance, vol.
The difference from the post-crisis period is that from the fourth quarter of 1998 to the third quarter of 2007, a larger share of the acquisitions involved an internal reorganization within a bank holding company.
A video on the results of the CSBS 2018 Survey of Community Banks is available on this conference's website at https://www.communitybanking.org/news; for more information on the survey, see the CSBS website at https://www.csbs.org.
Activities that qualify for community development tests must primarily focus on economic development, revitalization of low- and moderate-income (LMI) locales, affordable housing, and services that target to LMI individuals.
Large and intermediate small banks are subject to review of their community development activities while some small banks voluntarily choose to have their community development activities reviewed.


At "Nontraditional Data, Machine Learning, and Natural Language Processing in Macroeconomics," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
Good morning, and welcome to the Federal Reserve Board's research conference "Nontraditional Data, Machine Learning, and Natural Language Processing in Macroeconomics." Here at the Fed, we are continually assessing the current state of the economy, updating our outlook for economic activity, and estimating the risks around that outlook.
In this environment, we assess a broad array of government and private-sector data to determine what they imply for the achievement of the Fed's statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability.
More timely and accurate information sourced from nontraditional data and the use of new techniques should permit Board staff economists to make better estimates of the evolving news and what it implies for the economic outlook and allow policymakers to make better-informed decisions.
Over these next two days, you will hear about the use of new tools and nontraditional data sources and what they say for the assessment of inflation and the labor market; about the use of new methods for forecasting; and about extracting information from text and using textual analysis to evaluate regulatory complexity and understand central bank communications.
I am pleased to see some former colleagues and important contributors to macroeconomics and measurement on your conference program, such as Erica Groshen; Ron Jarmin; Matthew Shapiro; Hal Varian; and David Wilcox, who recently left the Fed for other pastures.
This conference is interdisciplinary, bringing together people from many different fields of study—economists, computer scientists, and statisticians—as well as people from many different types of institutions, including universities, central bank research departments, statistical agencies, and the private sector.
To a large extent, the use of nontraditional data, machine learning, and natural language processing in macroeconomics and for policy is only just in its infancy.
Coordination between statistical agencies and policymaking institutions will help us achieve our shared goal—a better understanding of the economy.
To this end, the discussions on the use of big data and new techniques for central banking and on the possibilities for cooperation between private companies and government agencies should be particularly helpful.
Moreover, I strongly encourage you to continue your discussions after the conference ends and to seek opportunities for joint work so that we can further develop our understanding of big data and textual analysis.
Now I would like to invite the participants in the session on alternative data on inflation and the labor market to come to the podium.
Welcome to the Federal Reserve, and I wish you a successful two days.

I was particularly delighted to be asked to speak at today's conference because the topic is law and macroeconomics, a field that my experience has persuaded me is of the first importance, but ill understood, and surprisingly understudied.
It has been the source of some of the most innovative and influential legal scholarship over the lifetimes of everyone here, and in many ways the insights of the law and economics movement have become the default framework that policy makers and practitioners alike use when we think about the law conceptually, and often even at the level of granular application.
Both law and microeconomics are centrally concerned with incentives—how are they constructed, how do they operate, how do legal or economic actors respond to them—and the interplay between these different ways to think about incentives has been a natural and fruitful focus of investigation in a broad range of legal studies: tort law, property law, criminal law, contract law, corporate law.
But both law and economics are also centrally concerned with systems, the performance and relationships of broad aggregates of laws or economic activity.
Not merely how do individual actors react to changes in incentives, but how do large-scale combinations of actors respond to changes in systems: how are legal or economic systems constructed, how do they operate, how do those systems constrain wide areas of human activity.
Rather an entire system of laws—laws relating to corporate governance, corporate combinations, taxation, litigation, labor—have evolved over an extended period of time.
And, under this theory, one outcome of this system—higher corporate profit margins—would likely give firms greater scope to increase wages without increasing prices, thus offering a potential explanation for the flattening of the Phillips curve, the traditional macroeconomic relationship between the unemployment rate and inflation.
For a policymaker who accepted this theory, his comfort in maintaining a very low rate of unemployment could depend significantly on his understanding of that underlying legal system and his estimation of how its evolution would likely proceed in the future.
Thus, the formal union of law and macroeconomics should seek to examine the interplay between a legal system and macroeconomic outcomes, above and beyond the connections a particular law may have with its impact on human behavior.
Scholars and policymakers have spent our time primarily thinking about the impact of single laws, but it is appropriate to focus more broadly, especially since we have in fact repeatedly sought over the past century to revamp our system of laws to improve macroeconomic outcomes.
Consider the roaring debate in the half-dozen years after the 1929 market crash that led to the establishment of the foundations of federal financial regulation in the United States.
Laws creating the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and a federal deposit insurance and receivership framework, establishing the Securities and Exchange Commission, and greatly expanding the responsibilities and capabilities of the Federal Reserve System were very purposefully intended to help restore confidence in the U.S.
financial system as a necessary condition to foster a recovery from the devastation of the Great Depression.
In essence, we designed and implemented a new system of financial regulatory laws to alter macroeconomic outcomes, not only to affect individual behavior.
The debate around those laws, in the 1930s, was not an academic one, because the pain and suffering of that era was evident—at the time Congress was debating the Banking Act of 1935, which established the modern framework for the federal bank regulation and supervision, the unemployment rate in the United States was still 20 percent.1
But we should recognize that rules to promote financial stability and a healthy economy have deep roots in the American legal tradition.
Building upon that strong tradition, I would like to focus this morning's remarks on the role that law and macroeconomics has played since the financial crisis in promoting a more stable economy.
After many decades of remarkable financial stability in the United States since the 1930s, the focus of financial oversight had moved away from systemic risks.
Prior to the financial crisis, the better part of our regulatory framework was microprudential in nature—individual laws geared toward mitigating the fallout from idiosyncratic shocks to firms.
This framework was designed to protect investors and depositors, viewed negative shocks as not originating from the financial system, and did not take into account risks that might be shared by financial firms.2 This is not to say that regulators did not understand the consequences of an interconnected system and the potential of contagion.
government, under the able leadership of Treasury Secretary Nicholas Brady, recognized and responded to the financial stability risks of the Latin American debt crisis of the 1980s.
The United States had interests in stabilizing allies in Latin America, but a central part of the motivation was to contain potential risks to the U.S.
Congress and the executive branch embraced a sweeping response, designing a system of laws to reflect a recognition that the cumulative, interconnected behavior of financial institutions had implications for financial stability and that even the behavior of a single large and complex institution could have implications for financial stability.
This new system was also adopted at the international level.
Starting with the G20 summit in Washington, D.C., in November 2008, the global community established the runway for a structural change.
The subsequent G20 summit in London led to the establishment of the Financial Stability Board (FSB), with a strengthened mandate as a successor to the Financial Stability Forum.
Subsequently, including at the following summit in Pittsburgh, world leaders agreed that the supervision of individual financial institutions had to account for the financial system as a whole, and it was recognized that shocks could originate from within the system and could spread to institutions with common exposures.
In other words, the supervisory framework had to be macroprudential—focusing on mitigating systemic risk and accounting for macroeconomic consequences.3 This reorientation was a defining part of the 2010 Dodd-Frank Act, and internationally, in the Basel III Accord.
Section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, in particular, requires the Board to implement heightened capital and liquidity standards, concentration limits, and stress testing—all to further the macroprudential purpose of preventing or mitigating risks to the financial stability of the United States.
As I will discuss later, the Board has followed through with rules such as the G-SIB surcharge, the liquidity coverage ratio, and single-counterparty credit limits, just to name a few; and, importantly, we have used macroeconomic considerations in calibrating some of these rules.
Indeed, global financial standard-setters have continued to adapt and learn as they implemented and updated regulations in line with the global consensus that was reflected in Basel III.
I would like to highlight three important regulatory paradigm shifts that follow from this renewed focus on macroprudential regulation.
First, in line with the pivot away from microprudential regulation, we have a renewed focus not only on the health of individual financial firms but on the amount of capital in the entire banking sector.
Note that the idea of improving the stability of the financial system by regulating individual bank capital has been around for decades.
Global policymakers began construction of the modern risk-based, bank capital framework in the 1980s, when the aforementioned Latin American debt crisis increased concerns that the capital held by large international banks was deteriorating.
Since then, regulators, such as the Board, have continued to have one eye focused on the capital held at individual firms.
Now, over a decade after the crisis, exercises such as stress testing have caused us to have the other eye focused on and assessing the amount of capital in the entire banking system.
Such analysis, including conventional –cost-benefit analysis, traditionally did not take macroeconomic variables like gross domestic product (GDP) growth or the unemployment rate.
Since regulators are given the task of maintaining the stability of the system as a whole, they must concern themselves with externalities and spillover effects to the broader economy.
At the Federal Reserve, several regulatory initiatives have exemplified this change in quantitative analysis.
At the height of the financial crisis, the Federal Reserve created the first stress test, the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP), to estimate potential losses at those banks, if economic and financial conditions worsened.
Building on SCAP, the Federal Reserve moved to the current stress testing assessment—the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR)—to evaluate whether the largest firms have sufficient capital to absorb potential losses and continue to lend under stressful conditions.
In the CCAR process, the Federal Reserve simulates macroeconomic scenarios like a recession in which GDP falls and the unemployment rate rises significantly.
In the 2019 stress test cycle, for example, we tested banks against a hypothetical global recession in which the unemployment rate in the United States rose to 10 percent.4 The stressed banks were required to show that they could continue to meet minimum capital requirements in the face of those hypothetical macroeconomic shocks.
Aside from CCAR, the FSB compiles an annual list of global systemically important banks (G-SIBs), which are subject to stricter capital requirements in the form of a capital surcharge.
These banks must meet this higher capital standard based on the judgement that their potential failure would have a larger, systemwide impact on the economy.
The goal, therefore, is to reduce a G-SIB's probability of failure so that its expected impact on the economy would be the same as that of a non-G-SIB.
Similarly, to reduce the risks of interconnectedness and contagion, the United States and other jurisdictions have implemented rules that limit the exposure that one bank may have to a single counterparty.
Finally, research on optimal bank capital levels by staff at regulatory and supervisory bodies around the world have factored in macroeconomic costs and benefits.
Specifically, these models assume that higher capital requirements would reduce the probability of a financial crisis occurring but would increase the cost of bank lending, thereby lowering GDP growth.
Not surprisingly, these models have produced a wide range of capital estimates given the wide range of underlying assumptions.
To be sure, none of the regulatory developments that I have discussed so far screams macroeconomics quite as loudly as a time-varying, discretionary regulatory regime the express goal of which is to fight pro-cyclicality.
Cyclicality—in this case, fluctuations in the economy based on the business cycle—is a concept that is near and dear to every macroeconomist's heart.
In fact, theoretical studies of economic cycles go back to the early 1800s, and the National Bureau of Economic Research's tracker of the U.S.
business cycle dates economic contractions and expansions back to the 1850s.
In the context of macroprudential regulation, pro-cyclicality represents a problem because banks tend to build up excessive credit during an economic expansion.
Limiting pro-cyclicality means limiting both the highs and lows of a credit cycle.
Along with many other jurisdictions, the United States adopted a countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) to address the issue.
CCyB is a capital buffer that ranges from zero percent to 2.5 percent of covered institutions' risk-weighted assets.
Domestic regulators have discretion to switch the CCyB on or off anywhere within that range in order to prevent or mitigate the overheating of credit markets under their jurisdiction.
In setting the buffer, the Federal Reserve takes into account, among other things, leverage in the financial sector, leverage in the nonfinancial sector, maturity and liquidity transformation in the financial sector, and asset valuation pressures.
Rather, regulators set the buffer based on their perception of the aggregate domestic credit cycle, whether it's too hot, too cold, or just right.
Based on this policy, the CCyB is currently set at zero percent in the United States but has been turned on in France, Hong Kong, Sweden, the United Kingdom, and Norway.
It is worth noting that, in the United Kingdom, the CCyB is set equal to a positive level—1 percent—in normal times.
As a result, their buffer can be adjusted upward or downward based on the perceived risks of the time-varying credit cycle.
First, while international agreements such as Basel III demonstrate that the international regulatory community has agreed on the high-level systematic changes and developed similar perspectives following the crisis, national governments gave different regulatory powers—in both degree and scope—to their central banks in pursuit of the new post-crisis consensus.5 In the United States, Congress did not change the Federal Reserve's dual mandate but did provide new responsibilities to promote financial stability.
There was no change to the European Central Bank's monetary policy mandate, but it received direct supervisory authority over some of the Eurozone's largest banks through the Single Supervisory Mechanism and also continues to monitor financial sector risks.
The Bank of Japan does not control Japan's macroprudential toolkit but does play an active role in monitoring systemic risk.
The Bank of England, on the other hand, was explicitly tasked with a new financial stability mandate, and it oversees macroprudential regulation.
In line with the debates over central bank independence and macroeconomic outcomes, legal scholars who engage in cutting-edge research on institutional design may have thoughts on which model leads to the best outcomes for financial stability.
Second, in addition to giving varying degrees of power to their central banks, national governments also created new bodies that promote financial stability, such as the FSB and the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC), to monitor systemic risk and identify systemically important institutions and activities.
There is nothing improper about mitigating negative externalities through regulation, and that is an important purpose of much post-crisis financial regulation.
However, it is also well-accepted that due process requires the fair, evenhanded application of laws so that individuals are not at the mercy of the arbitrary exercise of government power.8 As I have alluded to throughout my remarks, we are currently placing a much greater regulatory burden on a select group of banks—the largest and most complex firms—because we believe their failures would bring down the entire financial system.
Some might argue that, during the financial crisis, we dispensed with due process considerations while conducting version 1.0 of the stress tests.
This is why I have strongly pushed for the recent shift toward greater transparency around the structure of the stress tests and the models themselves.
In the same vein, I would welcome greater legal scholarship on the due process considerations associated with bank supervision as a process distinct from bank regulation.
By bank supervision, I refer to the processes and activities identified with examining banks, including checking compliance with laws and regulations, assessing bank capital and liquidity levels, assigning supervisory ratings to banks, and taking formal and informal enforcement actions.
While it is important for bank supervision to be up to the task of assessing the world's largest banks, especially in light of the financial stability risks that I have been describing today, an equally important task is making sure that supervisors are acting fairly.
Although questions of fairness are routine in law and economics, there is ample room to explore these issues as they relate to bank supervision.
Prior to the Banking Act of 1935, Congress had passed the National Bank Act of 1863 in response to the financial crisis that emerged during the early days of the American Civil War.
Its purpose was to create a national banking system and establish a national currency.
The following year, Congress passed the National Bank Act of 1864, which established the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and gave the federal government the authority to supervise commercial banks.
Some might even characterize the First and Second Banks of the United States as early efforts at law and macroeconomics.
See Claudio Borio, Towards a Macroprudential Framework for Financial Supervision and Regulation? (PDF) Bank of International Settlements Working Papers No.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2019 Supervisory Scenarios for Annual Stress Tests Required under the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Testing Rules and the Capital Plan Rule (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, February 2019).
See Ed Balls, James Howat, and Anna Stansbury, Central Bank Independence Revisited: After the Financial Crisis, What Should a Model Central Bank Look Like? (PDF) Harvard Kennedy School M-RCBG Associate Working Paper No.
Quarles, "The Financial Stability Board in 2019" (speech at the Joint Conference of the European Central Bank and the Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Frankfurt, Germany, March 2019).
See U.S Department of the Treasury, Financial Stability Oversight Council Annual Report 2018 (Washington: U.S.
See Paul Tucker, Unelected Power: The Quest for Legitimacy in Central Banking and the Regulatory State (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2018).

Vice Chair for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K.
At the Financial Stability Board Workshop on Pre-Positioning, Ring-Fencing, and Market Fragmentation, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Regulatory and supervisory colleagues, members of the Financial Stability Board's (FSB) Resolution Steering Group (ReSG) and Standing Committee on Supervisory and Regulatory Cooperation (SRC), representatives from academia, and the private sector: Thank you for being here, and for taking part in today's workshop on pre-positioning, ring-fencing, and market fragmentation.
I particularly want to thank Ryozo Himino, our new SRC chair, for his leadership in highlighting these issues; his remarks and efforts around market fragmentation are especially timely, as we begin the difficult task of examining the post-crisis reforms.
I also want to recognize and thank Sir Jon Cunliffe, for proposing a workshop where we can explore these issues together; as he recently said, quoting Ben Franklin, "we must all hang together, or most assuredly, we shall all hang separately."1 Finally, I want to thank the leadership and staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, for not just accommodating us, but making us feel welcome in the nation's first capital.2
The Philadelphia Fed is three blocks north, and another three west, from the birthplace of American central banking.
That birthplace is not the site of the First or Second Banks of the United States, whose neoclassical headquarters are still standing and open to the public.3 Instead, the first national bank sat just west of North 3rd Street and Chestnut: the Bank of North America.4
Its charter came from a new nation on the verge of bankruptcy.5 Six years of war had drained an already-short supply of domestic specie, a necessity for international trade.
The United States lacked a common, sound currency to settle its debts, and without federal authority to levy taxes, it lacked a ready path back to solvency.
A substantial loan in French bullion financed the new bank and saved the republic from collapse.
America could declare independence, but she could not secure it without credit from abroad.
Four years later, a new Pennsylvania legislature claimed that dividends to foreign creditors were draining much-needed specie from America's shores.
James Wilson, Pennsylvania's representative to the Continental Congress, wrote an impassioned legal and political defense of the bank, emphasizing its role in international commerce.
He quoted Sir James Steuart, one of the world's first economists, calling banking "that branch of credit which best deserves the attention of a statesman."7 It wasn't enough.
International banking is a very different enterprise than two centuries ago, but it still "best deserves the attention of a statesman." Cross-border finance is an essential part of the international economic infrastructure.
It channels capital to places and projects it could not otherwise reach, fostering innovation, international ties, and the exchange of ideas.
At its best, it is also self-sustaining, extending the financial and technical capacity of emerging economies, and expanding their role in the global economy.
America's experience, however, reminds us that the benefits of international banking are not automatic.
Cross-border finance is a common good, and like any common good, sustaining it requires collective action from a range of parties.9 These parties are both public and private, elected and appointed—not just central banks and supervisors, but finance ministries, legislatures, and commercial banking organizations.
With such a configuration, the cross-border financial system can be open, stable, and safe; without it, the system can become unpredictable and dangerous.
However, as I have noted previously, that term obscures a distinction that plays a vital role in cross-border finance—between prudently placing a constrained amount of capital and liquidity within jurisdictions and legal entities before a crisis, and competitively seizing capital and liquidity during a crisis.
Financial institutions need some certainty about the requirements they face by participating in cross-border activity.
Supervisors need some certainty about safety and soundness, not just of the foreign banks they host, but of their domestic banks operating overseas.
Creditors and investors need some certainty that a foreign authority won't abrogate their contracts.
It supports clear monitoring and thoughtful planning, by both institutions and their regulators.
It fosters more and deeper cross-border financial activity, by decreasing its risks and increasing its benefits, both to participants and to the global economy.
If we pursue certainty to the complete exclusion of any flexibility to respond to future events, we may end up undermining our ultimate goal: maintaining a financial system that is resilient to unexpected shocks.
These consequences were on full display during the financial crisis—the collapse in cross-border activity, when trust broke down; the rush to secure assets and prioritize domestic claims; the ambiguous relationship between banks' resources and their needs; and the long, halting return to a more integrated financial system.
Today's panelists will also revisit the steps that the international community took to address those consequences.
The workshop also examines the effect those steps have had on cross-border financial intermediation and the management of global financial institutions.
The panelists will provide their views on whether we have achieved the right balance among certainty, the kinds of economic opportunity that cross-border finance promotes, and the flexibility to manage through a future disruption.
When capital and liquidity requirements are imposed only at the level of the consolidated institution, they create a good deal of flexibility, but they cannot reassure host supervisors that sufficient resources will truly be available in a time of need.
Pre-positioning, at levels that go beyond what may be needed in a given jurisdiction in stress, can also create rigidity and limit growth opportunities.
The consequence of getting the balance between these considerations wrong is a less integrated and less resilient global financial system.
As with market fragmentation, the broader context of this work matters immensely, including the desired impact of the reforms and their anticipated and unanticipated consequences.
Within the Federal Reserve Board, we are considering similar questions—not only what level of loss-absorbing capacity is appropriate for the material legal entities within a large, cross-border financial institution, but also what tools we and other supervisors use to ensure such capacity exists.
There are clear advantages to setting liquidity and capital pre-positioning requirements through regulation.
There is also a role for supervision, not just in addressing the particular conditions at a given firm, but in generating and sharing better information on how stress may manifest, not just in the firm overall, but in each jurisdiction where it operates.
We are all ultimately responsible for creating the conditions where capital can flow freely, giving rise to genuine opportunity and sustainable growth.
Senate, "The Nine Capitals of the United States" (citing Robert Fortenbaugh, The Nine Capitals of the United States (1948), at 9).
National Park Service, "First Bank of the United States" (October 18, 2016); National Park Service, "Second Bank of the United States" (April 12, 2017).
Kaplan, The Bank of the United States and the American Economy (1999), at 3-10, and from Janet Wilson, "The Bank of North America and Pennsylvania Politics: 1781-1787," 66(1) Penn.
James Wilson, Considerations on the Bank of North-America (1785) (quoting Sir James Steuart, An Inquiry into the Principles of Political Oeconomy [sic]: Being an Essay on the Science of Domestic Policy in Free Nations, in which are particularly considered Population, Agriculture, Trade, Industry, Money, Coin, Interest, Circulation, Banks, Exchange, Public Credit, and Taxes," Vol.
In a satire in the Pennsylvania Gazette, a critic of the bank complains: "All honest men should support their country, by cheating their creditors: Creditors are the bane of a young country: So here is confusion to them all—a tender-law forever!" Janet Wilson, supra note 5, at 12 quoting Pennsylvania Gazette (September 21, 1785).
Williamson, "Beyond Markets and States: Polycentric Governance of Complex Economic Systems," Nobel Prize Lecture delivered at Aula Magna, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden (December 8, 2009).
Financial Stability Board, "FSB launches evaluation of too-big-to-fail reforms and invites feedback from stakeholders," news release (May 23, 2019).

The Federal Reserve’s Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices
At “A Hot Economy: Sustainability and Trade-Offs,” a Fed Listens event sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California
I am delighted to be in San Francisco today to participate in this Fed Listens conference, "A Hot Economy: Sustainability and Trade-Offs," which is one of a series of events associated with the Federal Reserve's 2019 review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.1
Although I will have more to say about the review in a moment, let me state at the outset that we believe our existing framework, which has been in place since 2012, has served us well and has enabled us to achieve and sustain our statutorily assigned goals of maximum employment and price stability.
economy operating at or close to maximum employment and price stability, now is an especially opportune time to conduct this review.
The unemployment rate is near a 50-year low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective.
With this review, we hope to ensure that we are well positioned to continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years.
and foreign economies have changed in some important ways since the Global Financial Crisis.
Perhaps most significantly, neutral interest rates appear to have fallen in the United States.3 A fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will hit its effective lower bound (ELB) in future economic downturns.
That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to support spending and employment and to keep inflation from falling too far below the 2 percent objective.4
Another key development in recent decades is that price inflation appears less responsive to resource slack.
That is, the short-run price Phillips curve—if not the wage Phillips curve—appears to have flattened, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.5 A flatter Phillips curve permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns—as was the case during and after the Great Recession—because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when the Phillips curve is flatter.6 However, a flatter Phillips curve also increases the cost, in terms of lost economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations.
Thus, a flatter Phillips curve makes it all the more important that inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.7 And let me emphasize that, based on the evidence I have reviewed, I judge that U.S.
inflation expectations today do reside in a range I consider consistent with our price‑stability mandate.
For some time now, price stability in the United States has coincided with a historically low unemployment rate.
This low unemployment rate, 3.7 percent in August, has been interpreted by many as suggesting that the labor market is currently operating beyond full employment.
However, we cannot directly observe the level of the unemployment rate that is consistent with full employment and price stability, u*, but must infer it from data via models.
I myself believe that the range of plausible estimates of u* extends to 4 percent and below and includes the current unemployment rate of 3.7 percent.
As the unemployment rate has declined in recent years, labor force participation for people in their prime working years has increased significantly, with the August participation rate at a cycle high of 82.6 percent.8 Increased prime-age participation has provided employers with additional labor resources and has been one factor, along with a pickup in labor productivity, restraining inflationary pressures.
Whether participation will continue to increase in a tight labor market remains to be seen.
Also, although the labor market is robust, there is no evidence that rising wages are putting upward pressure on price inflation.
Wages today are increasing broadly in line with productivity growth and underlying inflation.
Also of note, and receiving less attention than it deserves, is the material increase in labor's share of national income that has occurred in recent years as the labor market has tightened.
As I have written before, there is a cyclical regularity in U.S.
data that labor's share tends to rise as expansions endure and the labor market tightens.9 In recent cycles—and thus far in this cycle—this rise in labor's share has not put upward pressure on price inflation.
The strong job gains of recent years also have delivered benefits to groups that have historically been disadvantaged in the labor market.
For example, African Americans and Hispanics have experienced persistently higher unemployment rates than whites for many decades.10 However, those unemployment rate gaps have narrowed as the labor market has strengthened, and, as President Daly's research shows, there is some indication these groups especially benefit when the unemployment rate remains very low.11 Likewise, the gaps between unemployment rates for less-educated workers and their more-educated counterparts appear to narrow as the labor market strengthens.12 Wage increases in the past couple of years have been strongest for less-educated workers and for those at the lower end of the wage distribution.13
The Federal Reserve Act assigns to the Fed the responsibility to conduct monetary policy "so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates."14 Our review this year takes this statutory mandate as given and also takes as given that inflation at a rate of 2 percent is most consistent over the longer run with the congressional mandate.
Our existing monetary policy strategy is laid out in the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.15 First adopted in January 2012, the statement indicates that the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from 2 percent and deviations of employment from assessments of its maximum level.
In doing so, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) recognizes that these assessments of maximum employment are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision.
As a practical matter, our current strategy shares many elements with the policy framework known as "flexible inflation targeting."16 However, the Fed's mandate is much more explicit about the role of employment than that of most flexible inflation-targeting central banks, and our statement reflects this by stating that when the two sides of the mandate are in conflict, neither one takes precedence over the other.
The first question is, "Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective?"
Under our current approach as well as the approaches of many central banks around the world, persistent inflation shortfalls of the target are treated as "bygones." Central banks are generally believed to have effective tools for preventing persistent inflation overshoots, but the ELB on interest rates makes persistent undershoots more of a challenge.
Persistent inflation shortfalls carry the risk that longer-term inflation expectations become anchored below the stated inflation goal.17
In part because of that concern, some economists have advocated "makeup" strategies under which policymakers seek to undo past inflation deviations from target.
These strategies include targeting average inflation and price-level targeting, in which policymakers seek to stabilize the price level around a constant growth path.18 Other makeup strategies seek to reverse shortfalls in policy accommodation at the ELB by keeping the policy rate lower for longer than otherwise would be the case.19 In many models that incorporate the ELB, these makeup strategies lead to better average performance on both legs of the dual mandate.20
The success of makeup strategies relies on households and firms believing in advance that the makeup will, in fact, be delivered when the time comes—for example, that a persistent inflation shortfall will be met by future inflation above 2 percent.
As is well known from the research literature, makeup strategies, in general, are not time consistent because when the time comes to push inflation above 2 percent, conditions at that time will not justify that action.
Thus, one of the most important questions we will seek to answer in our review is whether the Fed could, in practice, attain the benefits of makeup strategies that are possible in theoretical models.
The next question the review will consider is, "Are existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded? And, if so, how?" The FOMC's primary monetary policy tool is its target range for the federal funds rate.
In December 2008, the FOMC cut that target to just above zero in response to financial turmoil and deteriorating economic conditions.
economy required additional support after the ELB was reached, the FOMC deployed two additional tools in the years following the crisis: balance sheet policies and forward guidance about the likely path of the federal funds rate.21
In addition to assessing the efficacy of these existing tools, the review will examine additional tools for easing policy when the ELB is binding.
During the crisis and its aftermath, the Federal Reserve considered but ultimately found some of the tools deployed by other central banks wanting in the U.S.
The third question the review will consider is, "How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?" Our communication practices have evolved considerably since 1994, when the Federal Reserve released the first statement after an FOMC meeting.
Over the past decade or so, the FOMC has enhanced its communication both to promote public understanding of its policy goals, strategy, and actions and to foster democratic accountability.
These enhancements include the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy; postmeeting press conferences; various statements about the principles and strategy guiding the Committee's normalization of monetary policy; and quarterly summaries of individual FOMC participants' economic projections, assessments about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, and judgments of the uncertainty and balance of risks around their projections.22
For example, there might be ways to improve communication about the coordination of policy tools or the interplay between monetary policy and financial stability.
Let me turn now to our review process itself.23 At our Fed Listens events, we are hearing from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including business and labor leaders, community development professionals, and academics.
At a research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago in early June, we heard from prominent academic economists as well as national and community leaders.
One panel discussion provided a valuable perspective on the labor market that could not otherwise be gleaned from the aggregate statistics we often consult.
Another panel discussion offered insights into how the monetary levers we pull and push affect communities, credit availability, and small businesses.
In addition to the Chicago conference, all 12 Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors have hosted or will soon host Fed Listens events.
This summer, the FOMC began to assess what we have learned at the Fed Listens events and to receive briefings from System staff on topics relevant to the review.24 At our July meeting, FOMC participants agreed that our current framework for monetary policy has served the Committee and the U.S.
FOMC participants noted that the Committee's experience with forward guidance and asset purchases has improved its understanding of how these tools operate.
As a result, the Committee could proceed more confidently in using these tools in the future if economic circumstances warranted.
However, overall, we judged that forward guidance and balance sheet tools, while helpful, did not eliminate the risk of returning to the ELB.
If forward guidance or balance sheet actions prove to be insufficient in future episodes, ELB constraints could impede the attainment of the Federal Reserve's dual-mandate objectives over time.
At our July meeting, we also noted that the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy has been helpful in articulating and clarifying the Federal Reserve's approach to monetary policy and agreed that any changes we might make to our strategy would likely call for some modification of this consensus statement.
I expect we will consider various topics, such as alternative policy strategies, options for enhanced use of existing monetary policy tools, possible additions to the policy toolkit, potential changes to communication practices, and the relationship between monetary policy and financial stability.
The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges.
What I can say is that any refinements or more material changes to our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today.
"Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF)" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8.
"Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"The Signaling Channel for Federal Reserve Bond Purchases (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Great Recession: Estimating the Macroeconomic Effects of a Spread Compression at the Zero Lower Bound (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Pioneering Price Level Targeting: The Swedish Experience 1931–1937," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14.
"Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy," Ben Bernanke's Blog, October 12.
"Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/5/230.
"Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 30–31, 2019," press release, August 21.
"Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?" Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.
"How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M.
Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol.
"The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy (PDF)," Occasional Paper Series 217.
"The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve (PDF)," speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19.
"Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June.
"Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF), report prepared for the 2017 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3.
"The Macroeconomic Effects of Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes," Economic Journal, vol.
"Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"What Has—and Has Not—Been Learned about Monetary Policy in a Low‐Inflation Environment? A Review of the 2000s," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
"The Federal Reserve's Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects," Economic Journal, vol.
"The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no.
"The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions," IMF Economic Review, vol.
"Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds., Handbook of Economic Forecasting, vol.
"Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework? (PDF)" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13–14.
"Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? (PDF)" FRBNY Economic Policy Review, vol.
"The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
"The Risky Steady State and the Interest Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-009.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," Journal of International Economics, vol.
"The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Quantitative Easing and Unconventional Monetary Policy—An Introduction," Economic Journal, vol.
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate," NBER Working Paper Series 19887.
"Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10.
"Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on the Nominal Interest Rate (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Average Inflation Targeting," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay? (PDF)" International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"A New Data Set on Monetary Policy: The Economic Forecasts of Individual Members of the FOMC," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Do Inflation-Targeting Central Banks Implicitly Target the Price Level? (PDF)" International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping? (PDF)" in World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.
"Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper Series 23311.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April (revised August 2018).
"The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123.
"Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities," FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25.
"Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," paper presented at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30–September 1.
"Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24.
"The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., January 19.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework.
They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes to its framework.
For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).
monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).
For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).
One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010).
As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions.
Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.
See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment.
Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation.
Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation.
Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s.
These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.
The box "The Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Individuals" in the Board's July 2018 Monetary Policy Report contains a discussion of recent developments in labor force participation rates for prime-age individuals; see Board of Governors (2018b, pp.
See Cajner and others (2017) for a careful examination of how labor market differentials by race and ethnicity have evolved over time.
See Aaronson and others (2019) for evidence on the relative behavior of unemployment rates by race and ethnicity in a strong labor market.
The authors find similar patterns for labor force participation rates and for employment-to-population ratios.
Disparities in labor market outcomes are also evident between urban and rural areas of the United States.
However, these gaps have not narrowed as the labor market has strengthened.
The box "Employment Disparities between Rural and Urban Areas" in the Board's February 2019 Monetary Policy Report examines these disparities in more detail; see Board of Governors (2019, pp.
Wage gains for workers with different wage levels and with different levels of education can be calculated using data from the Current Population Survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The Economic Policy Institute (2019) provides convenient tabulations of these data.
Even though the act lists three distinct goals, the Federal Reserve's mandate for monetary policy is commonly known as the "dual mandate." The reason is that an economy in which people who want to work either have a job or are likely to find one fairly quickly and in which the price level (meaning a broad measure of the price of goods and services purchased by consumers) is stable creates the conditions needed for interest rates to settle at moderate levels.
Quoted text from the Federal Reserve Act is in 12 U.S.C.
These risks could be exacerbated if households and businesses expect monetary policy to be insufficiently accommodative because of proximity to the ELB.
Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) provide an early discussion of how optimal monetary policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during the subsequent economic expansion.
Nessén and Vestin (2005) discuss the relationship between average inflation targeting and price-level targeting.
There is a dearth of empirical evidence on strategies seeking to make up for inflation deviations.
Central banks that pursue an inflation goal generally seek to achieve a specific rate of inflation by some time horizon—typically a couple of years ahead or over the "medium run"—without regard to past inflation deviations.
One exception is the Reserve Bank of Australia, whose inflation goal is specified as a range of 2–3 percent, on average, over the medium term" and thus might embed some notion of history dependence.
However, Ruge-Murcia (2014) argues that the drift in the price level in Australia is comparable with the drifts observed in economies with purely forward-looking specification of the inflation goal.
See also Kiley and Roberts (2017) for a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during economic expansions to compensate for below-target realizations of inflation during economic downturns.Return to text
See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) for a strategy in which a central bank following a Taylor rule makes up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes by subsequently keeping the policy rate lower than otherwise.
The box "Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules" in the Board's July 2018 Monetary Policy Report contains an application of such a modified rule; see Board of Governors (2018b, pp.
See English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) for applications of flexible price-level targeting and nominal income-targeting strategies to a quantitative model of the U.S.
As an illustration of the shortfall in policy support created by a binding ELB during the Global Financial Crisis, the simple policy rules considered in a January 2017 speech by then-Chair Janet Yellen prescribed setting the federal funds rate between negative 1-1/2 and negative 9 percent; see Yellen (2017).
In addition to using these two additional monetary policy tools, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of other measures to stabilize the financial system, increase household and business confidence, and more generally support the economic recovery.
These supplementary measures included the setting up of several credit facilities and the introduction of stress tests for systemically important financial institutions.
Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve published a summary of individual economic projections from various Board members, FOMC members, or FOMC participants in the semiannual Monetary Policy Report.
With the introduction of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in 2007, the FOMC increased the frequency of the releases of policymaker projections, expanded the set of economic variables included, and extended the forecast horizon.
Because the SEP includes individual contributions of projections and assessments from all FOMC participants, it captures a broader range of views than those of FOMC members.

Thanks to the Program on International Financial Systems and the European Central Bank for the opportunity to speak to you today.
I would like to take as my text today this reflection of the 20th-century philosopher, sociologist, and welterweight champion of the world, Oscar de la Hoya: "There's always room for improvement, no matter how long you've been in the business." As all of you know, 2019 marks the 10-year anniversary of our stress testing program in the United States.
In only 10 years, stress tests have developed from an innovative but untested tool to become a well-established element of the Federal Reserve's bank supervision program for large banks.
As the Federal Reserve has been considering refinements to our stress testing and capital frameworks, two goals have been at the forefront of our thinking: first, to simplify these frameworks to make them easier to apply and understand, and second, to maintain the overall high level of loss-absorbing capacity in the banking system.
And with that, there is always a risk that regulatory regimes will become less effective as they grow, developing redundancies and inconsistences that can obscure initial intentions and impair understanding.
Congress has been adjusting the Dodd-Frank Act since its enactment, and, likewise, the Federal Reserve and other regulators have been making adjustments in the wake of the financial crisis to innovations such as stress testing, a public process that in my view has helped make financial oversight more effective.
My second goal, in considering these adjustments, is to maintain the high level of loss-absorbing capacity in the U.S.
Our financial system today is far more resilient than it was before the crisis and I want to maintain that resiliency.
We are all better served by well-capitalized banks that have the ability to continue lending to households and businesses even during stressful times.
Before I delve into describing the future direction of our stress testing and capital frameworks, allow me to begin with some background on the origins of the stress testing program and an overview of the changes we have made to our capital requirements since the financial crisis.
At the height of the crisis, as a way to help restore confidence in the largest U.S.
banks, the Fed created the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) to estimate potential losses at those banks, if economic and financial conditions worsened.
Building on the success of SCAP, the Board moved to the current stress testing assessment, known as the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), to evaluate whether the largest firms have sufficient capital to continue to lend and absorb potential losses under severely adverse conditions.
At the same time that we were building our stress testing program, we were also making changes to capital rules to address weaknesses observed during the crisis.
These included new minimum capital requirements and a capital buffer on top of these requirements.
The buffer puts increasingly strict and automatic limits on capital distributions as a bank's capital declines toward the minimum.
Large banks are also subject to a potential countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB), which I will discuss more shortly.
And the largest banks are subject to an additional buffer of capital based on a measure of their systemic risk.
Stress testing and stronger capital requirements have combined to greatly strengthen the resiliency of the U.S.
At the banks subject to CCAR, risk-based capital ratios have more than doubled since 2009.
Combined, these firms now have more than $1 trillion of common equity capital, and a ratio of common equity to risk-weighted assets of 12.1%, which is many multiples over the required ratio of Tier 1 common in 2009.
banks are substantially more resilient to stress than in the past.
At the same time, I believe our regulatory measures are most effective when they are as simple and transparent as possible, and it is prudent to periodically review all of our practices to ensure that they are achieving these goals.
Importantly, although CCAR and our regulatory capital requirements share similar ends, they were developed separately, due to the exigencies of the crisis, and this has led to significant redundancies, which I will describe in detail in a moment.
But now that banks have built significant capital stores, I believe the overlapping requirements should be combined for efficiency and simplicity.
The proposal—known as the stress capital buffer—would simplify our regulatory regime by integrating the stress test with our non-stress capital rules.
For large bank holding companies, the SCB would replace the fixed-for-all-times-and-for-all-banks 2.5 percent risk-based capital buffer with a firm-specific buffer based on the firm's most recent stress test results.
This would integrate our stress testing capital requirements with our point-in-time capital requirements.
And as a result, the two separate capital frameworks would be combined into one.
Firms would have to manage according to one integrated set of requirements and, when their capital is insufficient, would be required to rebuild their resiliency through one integrated set of limitations on their capital distributions.
Originally, we had planned to make the SCB final for the 2019 stress test cycle.
The first element of the SCB proposal that I believe should be removed is the stress leverage buffer requirement.1 By its nature, a leverage ratio is a blunt instrument that treats all assets the same and therefore is not risk-sensitive.
Of course, leverage ratios, including the enhanced supplementary leverage requirements, would remain a critical part of our regulatory capital regime, and I believe our existing leverage ratios provide a sufficient backstop to the risk-based capital requirements.
For these reasons, it seems out of place and unnecessary to add a separate leverage capital buffer.2
The second element of the SCB proposal that I believe should be removed is the requirement for banks to pre-fund the next four quarters of their planned dividend payments.
The stress tests currently require banks to set aside sufficient capital today to "pre-fund" expected capital distributions, both dividends and repurchases, for all nine quarters of the capital planning horizon.
Additionally, the SCB already has a mechanism for curbing dividends and other distributions when a bank's capital ratio falls into the buffer.
I believe it is better to focus on the root cause of our concerns and take a comprehensive approach to ensuring that banks have sufficient capital, rather than focus on the individual elements of capital distributions.
And there can be value in doing so because, among other things, it can help reduce stress on our financial system.
With a counter-cyclical stress test, as the economy strengthens, the test should get tougher and be more stringent to mitigate the buildup of vulnerabilities during good times.
Experience has shown that vulnerabilities can build during good times as risk appetite grows and memories of earlier instability fade.
But likewise, when the economy does slow down, and losses mount at the banks, the tests should moderate so that firms can draw on the buffers built up during good times to absorb those losses while continuing to provide credit to qualified borrowers.
As an alternative to requiring pre-funding dividends and in furtherance of the other goals I have mentioned, I would like to suggest two co-equal options that, in my opinion, would simplify our capital requirements while limiting pro-cyclicality.
Importantly, these two options also are consistent with our goal of maintaining overall levels of capital in the banking system: The first option would be to set the CCyB at a higher baseline level during normal times.
Before I outline how we might modify the CCyB, let me explain what the CCyB is designed to accomplish and how it fits into the Board's overall financial stability efforts.
The CCyB, which was part of the original Basel III accord, is a macroprudential tool that allows the Board to dynamically adjust capital levels of large banking firms when the risks to financial stability have meaningfully changed.
In 2016, the Board released a policy statement detailing the conceptual framework it would follow to set the CCyB.
The policy statement details the range of financial-system vulnerabilities and other factors the Board may take into account as it evaluates settings for the buffer, including but not limited to, leverage in the financial sector, leverage in the nonfinancial sector, maturity and liquidity transformation in the financial sector, and asset valuation pressures.
Right now, our policy is to maintain a 0 percent CCyB when vulnerabilities are within the normal range, as they happen to be now.
When we determine that vulnerabilities have risen to be meaningfully above normal, the purpose of the CCyB is to increase capital to a level that compensates for those other rising vulnerabilities and thus reduces risks back to a normal level.
Some of those vulnerabilities have indeed been rising in recent years, but because of the strength of our capital requirements and CCAR, our assessment of overall vulnerabilities remains moderate.
This raises the question of whether our through-the-cycle capital levels in the United States have been set so high, that our CCyB is effectively already "on": we already have capital at a level that compensates for these increases in vulnerability, but because we did not reach that capital level through activation of the CCyB, we have no way of acting countercyclically in a future downturn.
I would advocate for revisiting that policy so that the CCyB is more closely integrated into our overall capital framework, allowing greater scope for dynamic adjustments.
While the Board has maintained the CCyB at zero since 2016, other countries have adjusted their countercyclical buffers in response to vulnerabilities within their financial sectors or, in the case of the United Kingdom, to integrate its CCyB with its structural capital requirements.
framework, adopted by their Financial Policy Committee, to be quite compelling.
Specifically, under the British framework, the CCyB would equal a positive amount—in the British case it's 1 percent—in standard risk conditions.
The effect of the policy is that the buffer can be varied in line with the changing risks that the banking system faces over time.
approach in the United States, although the specific percentage would of course be open to analysis.
It could provide a flexible mechanism that could complement other modifications to the SCB framework and allow the Board to adjust capital requirements as financial risks are evolving.
In addition, making greater use of a countercyclical capital buffer would quite directly advance the goal of making the overall capital regime less pro-cyclical.
Ultimately, I would expect that the new baseline for the CCyB would be set at a level that would maintain the overall level of capital in the U.S.
banking system throughout the business and financial cycles—that is, taking account of the likelihood that there would be periods where it would be above the baseline as well as below the baseline.
To be clear, this shift would require us to revisit our current CCyB policy and would introduce additional layers of decisionmaking complexity to the SCB proposal.
I'd also like to preemptively address a potential objection to this option.
That is, that it may be a "stealth" cut to our strong capital levels for the largest banks.
I reject that characterization, and it is not supported by the approach I have outlined today.
Indeed, the advantage of a truly flexible capital requirement is for it not only to provide additional resilience during a boom, but also to limit the risk of a pullback in credit supply aggravating an economic downturn.
Returning to our goals of increasing simplicity, mitigating pro-cyclicality, and maintaining the overall level of loss-absorbency in the system, I would like to advance another equally viable alternative to turning on the CCyB: raising the proposed SCB floor from the fixed 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets to a somewhat higher level—purely for the sake of illustration, let's say 3 percent.
Using 3 percent as an example, we would give each firm a buffer based on the firm's most recent stress test results, but which must be at least 3 percent.
For example, if a firm had a capital ratio decline of 2.7 percent during the stress tests, its SCB would nonetheless be sized at 3 percent, rather than 2.7 percent.
For firms that have stress test results indicating an SCB greater than 3 percent, this change would have no impact compared to last year's proposal.
For firms that have stress test results indicating an SCB at or slightly above 2.5 percent, this change would represent a modest increase in the stringency of the SCB.
Raising the floor may help to reduce pro-cyclicality by limiting the reduction in SCB capital buffers when stress test losses decrease during good times.
Raising the floor also would help moderate any increase in those buffers at the onset of economic downturn conditions as losses begin to increase.
This approach would have three significant benefits as compared to the CCyB option: greater simplicity, transparency, and predictability.
Raising the fixed floor would be simpler to execute than the CCyB proposal because raising the floor once and for all times would not require the Board to make complex, real-time decisions about how to adapt the regulatory framework to the evolving vulnerabilities to the economy.
Raising the fixed floor also would be more transparent and predictable for the public and the industry because a firm's capital requirement would vary less over time.
For firms whose losses are typically close to the existing 2.5 percent floor, this change will affect them more than others and produce a capital regime with slightly less risk sensitivity.
I also recognize, in terms of targeting pro-cyclicality, this approach would be much less direct than more actively managing the level of the CCyB.
In closing, let me say that it is my hope to have an SCB framework in place for the 2020 stress tests.
Of course, we will solicit public comment on potential revisions to the SCB proposal through the standard rulemaking process, and I expect that to occur in the near future.
I further expect that we will maintain the basic framework of the SCB while also incorporating some additional refinements, such as to address volatility and provide better notice for firms in planning their capital actions.
As I have stated, our goals remain to simplify our capital framework while maintaining the overall amount of capital in the U.S.
The refinements we are considering to the SCB framework would also improve the efficiency, coherence, and transparency of the regulatory capital framework and the core principles of our stress testing program that have proven successful.
I look forward to continued feedback on CCAR as we work through the improvements that I described, with a goal of ensuring that we maintain the same incentives for effective stress testing practices that exist today.
As I am sure Oscar would agree, there is always room for improvement in the stress testing ring.
As proposed in the SCB, firms would have been subject to a new stress leverage buffer, where their leverage ratio requirements would be sized based on their stress test each year.
See, for example, Donald Kohn and Nellie Liang, "Understanding the Effects of the U.S.
Stress Tests (PDF)" (paper presented at "Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review" Conference, Federal Reserve Board, July 9, 2019).

At a Fed Listens Event sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
This kind of comprehensive outreach on monetary policy is new for the Fed.
For many decades, there was a sense at the Board that the public wasn't interested or willing to dive into the complexities of monetary policy.
That view has changed in a fundamental way, especially in the aftermath of the financial crisis when it was urgently important that the public understand what we were doing.
Since I became a Board member almost a year ago, it's become clear to me that people not only are willing to engage on complex economic issues, they also want to know that their concerns are being taken into account on issues that affect their financial well-being.
When we communicate our views on the economic outlook and our expectations for where interest rates may be heading, consumers and businesses take that information into account when making decisions on spending, investment, and hiring.
For that reason, our policy communications are themselves an important part of the Fed's toolkit for influencing the direction of the economy.
We want to hear from people, from different parts of the country and different sectors of the economy, about how monetary policy affects them and their communities.
And, hearing a broad range of perspectives on these issues will help us make good decisions as we consider new approaches to monetary policy.
This afternoon, individual stakeholders representing different economic sectors will meet to discuss their perspectives.
Louis Fed's Agriculture Industry Council's priorities for the monetary policy review.
And as a former community banker, I am of course interested in what your Community Depository Institution Council has to share with us today.
I want to know, for example, how monetary policy affects rural communities, like the one I come from in Kansas, but I also want to know how it affects urban communities.
Our monetary policy review will have implications for financial markets, but we also want to know more about what the effect will be on Main Street—which, by the way, happens to be the name of the street where my family's bank is located, in Council Grove, Kansas.
My colleagues and I are keenly aware of our responsibility to focus on how the decisions we make affect the real economy for people in communities all across the country.
And we will continue these listening sessions for the rest of this year as we consider possible changes to the Federal Reserve's approach to monetary policy.
The two goals for monetary policy—maximum employment and stable prices—are determined by the Congress and are not subject to our review.
For many years, inflation has run modestly below our 2 percent objective.
Given that, it would be helpful to hear from you whether you think the Federal Open Market Committee should consider strategies that aim to have inflation exceed our target for a time, to make up for the earlier period of time when it fell short.
Or would that threaten the decades of success the Fed has had keeping the public's expectations for inflation low and stable?
A related question concerns the Fed's existing toolkit for monetary policy.
Currently, our policy levers include setting interest rates, adjusting the size and composition of our balance sheet, and communicating the expected future path of policy.
Are there other tools we should consider to help us reach and sustain our objectives more effectively? I also want to know how the Federal Open Market Committee's communication of its policy framework to the public might be improved.
Your perspectives on questions like these are a vital part of this monetary policy review, so I want to thank you, again, for your time and your contribution.
Once the policy review is complete, we will share our findings with the public, probably during the first half of next year.

At the "Challenges for Monetary Policy" symposium, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming
This year's symposium topic is "Challenges for Monetary Policy," and for the Federal Reserve those challenges flow from our mandate to foster maximum employment and price stability.
From this perspective, our economy is now in a favorable place, and I will describe how we are working to sustain these conditions in the face of significant risks we have been monitoring.
expansion has entered its 11th year and is now the longest on record.1 The unemployment rate has fallen steadily throughout the expansion and has been near half-century lows since early 2018.
But that rate alone does not fully capture the benefits of this historically strong job market.
Labor force participation by people in their prime working years has been rising.
While unemployment for minorities generally remains higher than for the workforce as a whole, the rate for African Americans, at 6 percent, is the lowest since the government began tracking it in 1972.
People who live and work in low- and middle-income communities tell us that this job market is the best anyone can recall.
Inflation has been surprisingly stable during the expansion: not falling much when the economy was weak and not rising much as the expansion gained strength.
Inflation ran close to our symmetric 2 percent objective for most of last year but has been running somewhat below 2 percent this year.
Thus, after a decade of progress toward maximum employment and price stability, the economy is close to both goals.
Our challenge now is to do what monetary policy can do to sustain the expansion so that the benefits of the strong jobs market extend to more of those still left behind, and so that inflation is centered firmly around 2 percent.
A good place to start is with the passage of the Employment Act of 1946, which stated that it is the "continuing policy and responsibility of the Federal Government ...
The first era raises the question whether a central bank can resist the temptations that led to the Great Inflation.
The second era raises the question whether long expansions supported by better monetary policy inevitably lead to destabilizing financial excesses like those seen in the Great Moderation.
The third era confronts us with the question of how best to promote sustained prosperity in a world of slow global growth, low inflation, and low interest rates.
Era I, 1950–1982: Policy Breeds Macroeconomic Instability and the Great Inflation
As the 1940s turned to the 1950s, the state of knowledge about how best to promote macroeconomic stability was limited.
The 1950s and early 1960s saw the economy oscillating sharply between recession and growth above 6 percent (figure 1, panel A).
With the benefit of hindsight, the lack of stability is generally attributed to "stop and go" stabilization policy, as monetary and fiscal authorities grappled with how best to modulate the use of their blunt but powerful tools.3
Beginning in the mid-1960s, "stop and go" policy gave way to "too much go and not enough stop"—not enough, that is, to quell rising inflation pressures.
Both inflation and inflation expectations ratcheted upward through four expansions until the Fed, under Chairman Paul Volcker, engineered a definitive stop in the early 1980s (figure 1, panel C).
Each of the expansions in the Great Inflation period ended with monetary policy tightening in response to rising inflation.
Policymakers came out of the Great Inflation era with a clear understanding that it was essential to anchor inflation expectations at some low level.
But many believed that central bankers would find it difficult to ignore the temptation of short-term employment gains at the cost of higher inflation down the road.4
As the second era began, inflation was falling, and it continued to fall for about a decade (figure 2, panel C).
In 1993, core inflation, which omits the volatile food and energy components, first fell below 2.5 percent, and has since remained in the narrow range of 0.9 percent to 2.5 percent.5 Greater success on price stability came with greater success on employment.
Anchored inflation expectations helped make this win-win outcome possible, by giving the Fed latitude to support employment when necessary without destabilizing inflation.
And twice during the long expansion of the 1990s, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) eased policy in response to threats to growth.
In 1995, responding to evidence of slowing in the United States and abroad, the FOMC reduced the federal funds rate over a few months.
In 1998, the Russian debt default and the related collapse of the hedge fund Long‑Term Capital Management rocked financial markets that were already fragile from the Asian financial crisis.
economy, the FOMC again lowered the federal funds rate over a period of months until events quieted.
The 10-year expansion weathered both events with no discernible inflation cost.7
By the turn of the century, it was beginning to look like financial excesses and global events would pose the main threats to stability in this new era rather than overheating and rising inflation.
The collapse of the tech stock bubble in 2000 and the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks played key roles in precipitating a slowdown that turned into a recession.8 And the next expansion, as we are all painfully aware, ended with the collapse of a housing bubble and the Global Financial Crisis.
Era III, 2010 and After: Monetary Policy and the Emerging New Normal
I will fast-forward past the early years of the expansion and pick up the story in December 2015.9 The unemployment rate had fallen from a peak of 10 percent to 5 percent, roughly equal to the median FOMC participant's estimate of the natural rate of unemployment at the time.
At this point, the Committee decided that it was prudent to begin gradually raising the federal funds rate based on the closely monitored premise that the increasingly healthy economy called for more-normal interest rates.
The premise was generally borne out: Growth from the end of 2015 to the end of 2018 averaged 2.5 percent, a bit above the 2.2 percent rate over the previous five years (figure 2, panel A).
The unemployment rate fell below 4 percent, and inflation moved up and remained close to our 2 percent objective through much of 2018 (figure 2, panels B and C).
Before turning to issues occupying center stage at present, I want to address a long-running issue that I discussed here last year: tracking the "stars" that serve as guideposts for monetary policy.10 These include u*, the natural rate of unemployment, and r*, the neutral real rate of interest.
We must judge their locations as best we can based on incoming data and then add an element of risk management to be able to use them as guides.
Since 2012, declining unemployment has had surprisingly little effect on inflation, prompting a steady decline in estimates of u* (figure 3).11 Standard estimates of r* have declined between 2 and 3 percentage points over the past two decades.
A lower r* combined with low inflation means that interest rates will run, on average, significantly closer to their effective lower bound.
The key question raised by this era, then, is how we can best support maximum employment and price stability in a world with a low neutral interest rate.
Let me turn now to the current implications for monetary policy of the questions raised by these three eras.
Inflation has averaged less than 2 percent over the past 25 years, and low inflation has been the main concern for the past decade.
Low inflation seems to be the problem of this era, not high inflation.
Nonetheless, in the unlikely event that signs of too-high inflation return, we have proven tools to address such a situation.
Hyman Minsky long argued that, as an expansion continues and memories of the previous downturn fade, financial risk management deteriorates and risks are increasingly underappreciated.13 This observation has spurred much discussion.
But we can work to make sure that they bear the costs of their decisions, and that the financial system as a whole continues to function effectively.
Since the crisis, Congress, the Fed, and other regulatory authorities here and around the world have taken substantial steps to achieve these goals.
Banks and other key institutions have significantly more capital and more stable funding than before the crisis.
We comprehensively review financial stability every quarter and release our assessments twice a year to highlight areas of concern and allow oversight of our efforts.
We have not seen unsustainable borrowing, financial booms, or other excesses of the sort that occurred at times during the Great Moderation, and I continue to judge overall financial stability risks to be moderate.
A low neutral interest rate presents both near-term and longer-term challenges.
Because today's setting is both challenging and unique in many ways, it may be useful to lay out some general principles for assessing and implementing appropriate policy and to describe how we have been applying those principles.
Through the FOMC's setting of the federal funds rate target range and our communications about the likely path forward for policy and the economy, we seek to influence broader financial conditions to promote maximum employment and price stability.
Because the most important effects of monetary policy are felt with uncertain lags of a year or more, the Committee must attempt to look through what may be passing developments and focus on things that seem likely to affect the outlook over time or that pose a material risk of doing so.
Risk management enters our decisionmaking because of both the uncertainty about the effects of recent developments and the uncertainty we face regarding structural aspects of the economy, including the natural rate of unemployment and the neutral rate of interest.
It will at times be appropriate for us to tilt policy one way or the other because of prominent risks.
But fitting trade policy uncertainty into this framework is a new challenge.
Setting trade policy is the business of Congress and the Administration, not that of the Fed.
Our assignment is to use monetary policy to foster our statutory goals.
In principle, anything that affects the outlook for employment and inflation could also affect the appropriate stance of monetary policy, and that could include uncertainty about trade policy.
There are, however, no recent precedents to guide any policy response to the current situation.
Moreover, while monetary policy is a powerful tool that works to support consumer spending, business investment, and public confidence, it cannot provide a settled rulebook for international trade.
We can, however, try to look through what may be passing events, focus on how trade developments are affecting the outlook, and adjust policy to promote our objectives.
This approach is illustrated by the way incoming data have shaped the likely path of policy this year.
economy since the start of the year has continued to be a favorable one.
Business investment and manufacturing have weakened, but solid job growth and rising wages have been driving robust consumption and supporting moderate growth overall.
As the year has progressed, we have been monitoring three factors that are weighing on this favorable outlook: slowing global growth, trade policy uncertainty, and muted inflation.
The global growth outlook has been deteriorating since the middle of last year.
Trade policy uncertainty seems to be playing a role in the global slowdown and in weak manufacturing and capital spending in the United States.
Inflation fell below our objective at the start of the year.
Committee participants have generally reacted to these developments and the risks they pose by shifting down their projections of the appropriate federal funds rate path.
Along with July's rate cut, the shifts in the anticipated path of policy have eased financial conditions and help explain why the outlook for inflation and employment remains largely favorable.
Turning to the current context, we are carefully watching developments as we assess their implications for the U.S.
We have seen further evidence of a global slowdown, notably in Germany and China.
economy has continued to perform well overall, driven by consumer spending.
Job creation has slowed from last year's pace but is still above overall labor force growth.
Inflation seems to be moving up closer to 2 percent.
Based on our assessment of the implications of these developments, we will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objective.
Looking back over the three eras, monetary policy has evolved to address new challenges as they have arisen.
The inflation targeting regime that emerged after the Great Inflation has led to vastly improved outcomes for employment and price stability around the world.
This new pattern has led us to understand that assuring financial stability over time requires much greater resilience in our financial system, particularly for our largest, most complex banks.
As we look back over the decade since the end of the financial crisis, we can again see fundamental economic changes that call for a reassessment of our policy framework.
The current era has been characterized by much lower neutral interest rates, disinflationary pressures, and slower growth.
We face heightened risks of lengthy, difficult-to-escape periods in which our policy interest rate is pinned near zero.
To address this new normal, we are conducting a public review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications—the first of its kind for the Federal Reserve.
We are evaluating the pros and cons of strategies that aim to reverse past misses of our inflation objective.
We are examining the monetary policy tools we have used both in calm times and in crisis, and we are asking whether we should expand our toolkit.
In addition, we are looking at how we might improve the communication of our policy framework.
We will continue reporting on our discussions in the FOMC minutes and share our conclusions when we finish the review next year.
"Rules, Discretion and Reputation in a Model of Monetary Policy," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"The Great Moderation," speech delivered at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, February 20.
"Monetary Policy since the Onset of the Crisis," speech delivered at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30–September 1.
"Whom Can We Trust to Run The Fed? Theoretical Support for the Founders' Views," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
National Bureau of Economic Research, Business Cycle Dating Committee (2001).
"Milton Friedman and the Federal Reserve Chairs, 1951–1979 (PDF)," paper presented at the Economics History Seminar, University of California, Berkeley, October.
"Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23–25.
"On Falling Neutral Real Rates, Fiscal Policy, and the Risk of Secular Stagnation (PDF)," paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8.
"A Rehabilitation of Monetary Policy in the 1950s," American Economic Review, vol.
"Has the Business Cycle Changed? Evidence and Explanations (PDF)," paper presented at "Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 28–30.
The National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) has classified business cycle turning points back to 1854 (see https://www.nber.org/cycles.html).
See Declaration of Policy, section 2 of the Employment Act of 1946, Pub.

For further discussion, see "Full Employment and Balanced Growth Act of 1978 (Humphrey-Hawkins)" on the Board's website at https://www.federalreservehistory.org/essays/humphrey_hawkins_act.
Romer and Romer (2002) document that the Federal Open Market Committee understood the essence of sound policy.
As discussed by Faust (1996), the structure of FOMC governance was motivated by the traditional view that governments are tempted to resort to inflation in times of stress.
With the post–World War II emphasis on full employment and understanding the role of inflation expectations, this tendency was reformulated as seeking near-term gains on employment at the cost of long-term inflation (Kydland and Prescott, 1977; Barro and Gordon, 1983).
Overall inflation, which is the subject of our symmetric 2 percent objective, has been somewhat more volatile, but it is neither practical nor wise to try to smooth purely transitory inflation fluctuations.
As such transitory fluctuations are frequently driven by volatile food and energy prices, I am citing the stability of core inflation on a four-quarter basis as a proxy for Fed performance in achieving the relevant sense of stability.
Analysts debate the role that monetary policy and other factors, such as luck and structural change in the economy, played in bringing about the Great Moderation.
For example, Ahmed, Levin, and Wilson (2004) find an important role for luck.
Stock and Watson (2003) attribute much of the change to an unexplained improvement in the tradeoff between inflation and output variability.
Like Bernanke (2004), I believe that better policy was an important factor behind the better outcomes, perhaps allowing other factors to show through.
Indeed, as I noted at this symposium last year, inflation ran surprisingly low in the second half of the 1990s (Powell, 2018).
Regarding declaring the 2001 recession, the NBER Business Cycle Dating Committee stated, "Before the [September 11] attacks, it is possible that the decline in the economy would have been too mild to qualify as a recession" (NBER, 2001, p.
The fact that inflation did not react much to changing unemployment also led some to reassess other structural features such as the slope of the Phillips curve.
As discussed in Rachel and Summers (2019), many factors combine to determine the normal growth rate of the economy and r*.
Persistent movements in longer-term interest rates in a stable inflation environment are one indicator of r* movements.

I've spent most of my career in the private sector, and as I think about the approach of UCNS as a nonprofit organization, I am struck by the extent of entrepreneurship you bring to your work.
Some of those returns, measured in dollars, help you continue to carry out your mission, but some of them also come in the form of promoting small businesses, affordable housing, and community facilities such as recreation centers, health-care clinics, and childcare facilities, among other things that build stronger communities.
Private- and public-sector partners who support community development value entrepreneurship, and it also makes for a healthier and more sustainable organization, which allows you to continue your important work.
I expect a large part of this success comes from the collaborative approach that you take to those efforts.
These important investments help workers get access to the transportation they need to get to work, without a longer commute that strains finances and detracts from family life.
Housing affordability is a growing challenge in Utah, and promoting mass transit—among UCNS's other objectives—has a role to play in keeping housing and transportation affordable.
A collaborative approach also shows up in the close partnership that UCNS has had with local governments to establish and maintain the Utah Small Business Growth Initiative, which supports economic development and job creation by helping small businesses qualify for financing with banks or other financial institutions.
This kind of cross-sector collaboration between the private, public, and nonprofit sectors is critically important to extending economic opportunity and access to financial services to low- and moderate-income families.
I am happy to report that organizations like UCNS have an active partner in the Federal Reserve, through our community development function, when it comes to supporting these types of partnerships.
The Federal Reserve is actively engaged on this issue, and has conducted research and brought together stakeholders to understand it better and consider solutions.
As many of you in this room probably know, Utah is located within the district of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
The event brought together community development financial institutions, local transit authorities, banks, policymakers, and other stakeholders and included participants from Salt Lake City.
Turning to support for small businesses, community development staffers across the Federal Reserve conduct extensive research and analysis of the challenges and opportunities facing small business owners.
For example, the 12 Federal Reserve Banks collaborate on the annual Small Business Credit Survey, which surveys business owners about their financing needs and experiences to provide timely insights to policymakers, service providers, and lenders.3 In addition to providing information on small business credit conditions, the Federal Reserve is trying to advance understanding of the best economic development strategies for supporting small businesses.
The Kansas City Fed has helped lead on these issues through its "Grow Your Own" entrepreneurship-based economic development guidebook, and its 2018 Growing Entrepreneurial Communities Summit.4
These are just a few of the ways that Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors support the efforts of community development organizations.
I hope that our work will be useful as you chart a path forward for your second decade of service to Utah, and I look forward to continued collaboration between the Federal Reserve and community development organizations such as UCNS.
UCNS is the parent organization of four separate organizations that, in combination, work to advance access to affordable housing, including homeownership and housing near high-capacity or high-frequency transit; support economic development and job creation by funding small businesses; and improve access to important community infrastructure.
Elizabeth Mattiuzzi, "Funds for Kickstarting Affordable Housing Preservation and Production: Lessons for New Investors," Community Development Research Briefs (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, March 2019).

At the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Town Hall, Kansas City, Missouri
It is a pleasure to be here in Kansas City with Federal Reserve Bank President Esther George to talk about the future of America's payment system.1
Our payment system is a vital part of America's infrastructure that touches everyone.
The choices we make about our payment infrastructure today will affect all Americans many years into the future.
Today I am excited to announce the Federal Reserve will invest in a new service to help ensure that real-time payments are available to everyone.
The Federal Reserve will develop the FedNow ServiceSM, a real-time payment and settlement service for the future.2 Everyone deserves the same ability to make and receive payments immediately and securely, and every bank deserves the same opportunity to offer that service to its community.
FedNow will permit banks of every size in every community across the country to provide real-time payments to their customers.
With a Federal Reserve real-time retail payment infrastructure, the funds would be available immediately—to pay utility bills or split the rent with roommates, or for small business owners to pay their suppliers.
Immediate access to funds could be especially important for households on fixed incomes or living paycheck to paycheck, when waiting days for the funds to be available to pay a bill can mean overdraft fees or late fees that can compound.
Last November, we asked the public about possible actions the Federal Reserve could take to support interbank settlement of faster payments.3 We received more than 350 comments on a Federal Reserve faster payment service, representing nearly 800 organizations.
Fully 90 percent of these comments called for the Federal Reserve to operate a real-time service for faster payments.
Support came from a wide range of stakeholders, including individuals, merchants, fintech firms, and banks.4 Commenters noted that the Federal Reserve would ensure equitable access to banks of all sizes nationwide by operating a real-time service for faster payments alongside the private-sector system.
Commenters highlighted the importance of safety in faster payments and noted the Federal Reserve's record of resiliency, especially during periods of stress.
Commenters observed that a Federal Reserve real-time retail payment service would increase competition, decrease market concentration, and provide a neutral platform for innovation.
Treasury Department recommended that "the Federal Reserve move quickly to facilitate a faster retail payment system, such as through the development of a real-time settlement service that would also allow for more efficient and widespread access to innovative payment capabilities."5
In determining the path forward, we are building on the Federal Reserve's long history of operating payment systems as a core part of the nation's payment infrastructure.
Since they opened for business around the country in 1914, as directed by the Congress, the Federal Reserve Banks have provided payment and settlement services—in healthy competition with private-sector providers—to achieve public benefits ranging from resiliency to innovation to equal access.
When you look across the current payment infrastructure, whether in check processing, automated clearinghouse (ACH) services, or funds transfers, you will see a Federal Reserve service operating alongside private-sector providers.
The General Accountability Office has concluded that the Federal Reserve's provision of payment services has benefited the U.S.
The Federal Reserve does not have regulatory authority over the pricing set by a private-sector system or to require a private-sector system to extend the service to banks of all sizes, particularly the last mile.
In some other countries, central banks have been assigned the responsibility for regulating payment systems.
However, this is not the approach that Congress has taken.
Instead, the Federal Reserve's role as an operator has long been seen as an effective approach to promote accessible, safe, and efficient payments in the United States.
Through the FedNow Service, we will provide a foundation for the future—a modern payment infrastructure that allows innovation and competition to flourish and delivers faster payments safely and securely for all.
Given our long-standing service connections with more than 10,000 banks across the country, the Federal Reserve is uniquely placed to deliver this outcome.
The bar is high when we assess whether the Federal Reserve should provide a new payment and settlement service, as it should be.
We have carefully analyzed the criteria of the Monetary Control Act and long-standing Federal Reserve policies, considered the comments provided by a wide range of stakeholders, and studied the experiences of foreign central banks.7 We are not making this decision lightly.
On balance, after carefully weighing important considerations on both sides, we have concluded it is our responsibility to take action in support of a real-time payment infrastructure accessible to all.
While we will work hard to stand up the FedNow Service in a timely manner, our most important goal is to achieve nationwide access for all, reflecting our public mission.
A key foundation of the payment infrastructure is interbank clearing and settlement—the movement of funds and the associated information between banks.
In contrast, here in the United States, the gap between the transaction capabilities in the digital economy and the underlying payment and settlement capabilities continues to grow.8
Early adopters of fast payment services rely on a legacy infrastructure that was not designed to support faster payments.
This type of settlement entails a buildup of obligations—like IOUs between banks—that could present real risks to the financial system in times of stress.
These are not resilient long-term solutions for our dynamic economy and the banks that support it.
We are seeing some companies looking to establish a payment system that bypasses our banks and our currency.
But one thing is clear: consumers and businesses across the country want and expect real-time payments, and the banks they trust should be able to provide this service securely—whatever their size.
To provide everyone with the ability to send and receive funds securely on a 24x7x365 basis, banks need to embrace and invest in real-time innovations, and the Federal Reserve needs to provide a safe and efficient real-time interbank clearing and settlement service accessible to all banks.
We have provided vital support to the sole private-sector provider of real-time settlement for faster payments, and we will continue to do so.
The Federal Reserve provided a joint account to enable the private-sector operator to offer real-time payments.
That said, the joint account structure, with its requirement of prefunding and settlement on a private ledger, is fundamentally different from the approach the Federal Reserve will use to settle transactions directly between banks.
Fostering a Dynamic and Resilient Payment Infrastructure That Serves Everyone
The Federal Reserve is committed to fulfilling our public policy goals in a spirit of cooperation and competitive fairness.
We are pleased that the private-sector faster payment service is in the market, and we see important benefits from the resilient and competitive market that would result from the FedNow Service providing an alternative consistent with the requirements of the Monetary Control Act.
The requirement to consider the best way to make our payment and settlement services accessible to banks across the country, along with long-standing principles including cost recovery over the long run, guides our assessment of when the Federal Reserve should engage in the payment system.9 In setting fees, the Federal Reserve is required by statute to "give due regard to competitive factors and the provision of an adequate level of such services nationwide."10 I want to share with you some of the analysis—viewed through the prism of our public policy goals of accessibility, safety, and efficiency—that we considered in making today's decision.
Accessibility means serving more than 10,000 banks of varying sizes and missions that are in communities all around the country.
It turns out no single private-sector provider of any U.S.
payment system has ever achieved nationwide reach on its own, whether it be checks, ACH, cards, or wire transfers.
In contrast, because of our experience with providing other services, the Federal Reserve already has invested in connections and customer service relationships with nearly every bank, small and large, across the country.
Currently, we provide payment services to nearly all banks either directly or indirectly.
With our 12 regional Reserve Banks, we have the capacity to meet the needs of banks serving different communities and with different needs and operating models.
For that reason, commenters stated that the Federal Reserve is uniquely positioned to offer nationwide access to a new payment and settlement service for faster payments.
FedNow will allow faster payments to reach banks of all sizes and their customers across the country, which is especially important for rural communities, who often struggle with access to financial services.
Guided by our public mission, the Federal Reserve serves the needs of all banks, no matter how small or challenging to reach, and with competitive fairness.
In response to our request for feedback last November, several commenters emphasized how much they value the Federal Reserve's mission of providing nationwide access on fair, transparent terms and expressed concern that a sole private-sector RTGS service provider may be less likely to exhibit the same commitment over the long run.
If the Federal Reserve does not establish the FedNow Service, there will be a single provider of real-time retail payment services.
We are mindful of the serious safety issues associated with a single point of failure, a risk that will rise as faster payments grow.
Stakeholders have noted the importance of having access to more than one real-time payment service for back-up purposes in order to provide resiliency through redundancy.
In fact, many banks already take advantage of having connections to multiple operators today in check, ACH, and wire services.
The Federal Reserve has always had a vital role in promoting the safety and stability of the U.S.
payment system by providing liquidity and operational continuity especially in times of stress.
The FedNow Service would allow the Federal Reserve to extend this role into the real-time retail payment market.
real-time retail payment infrastructure stands to gain from competition, including through higher service quality and lower prices over the long run, which in turn should support wider adoption.
The FedNow Service will provide a neutral foundation for innovation and competition in end-user faster payment services.
In response to the request for feedback, merchants and fintech companies commented that a Federal Reserve real-time retail payment service could broaden the scope for innovation in faster payments.
They noted that a single provider that is owned and operated by one segment of the payment industry may focus on a narrow set of use cases that do not reflect the full breadth of possible use cases for faster payments.
Recognizing the vibrancy of our payment industry, the addition of the FedNow Service could provide a springboard for broader private-sector participation in the development of innovative end-user services.
With the announcement of the Federal Reserve real-time payment service, we are embracing a path that will bring transformative, rather than incremental, change to the retail payment infrastructure in the United States.
In the months ahead, we intend to explore a variety of approaches to achieving a real-time retail payment infrastructure with nationwide reach.
One such approach might be for different payment services to interoperate by exchanging payments among the services directly.
Such interoperability is an important goal that we will pursue as standards, technology, and industry practices change over time, although it is not yet clear whether it will be an initial feature.
The Federal Reserve plans to devote the necessary resources to deliver the highest quality FedNow Service in a timely manner.
President George will play an integral role in this new process, and the Conference of Reserve Bank Presidents has pledged its support.
It is important for the Federal Reserve, working with the payment industry, to act quickly in finalizing the initial business requirements of the FedNow Service.
We will need to hear the views of payment system stakeholders on the features of the FedNow Service, as discussed in the Federal Register notice announced today.
We hope that these conversations will provide an opportunity for stakeholders to work together to shape the evolution of the U.S.
Earlier this month, I joined my Reserve Bank colleagues for a visit with bankers and community organizations in Scranton, Pennsylvania, to hear about the biggest challenges they are facing.
The head of a bank that has been serving the Scranton area for more than a century told me that for his community bank to remain competitive in its payment offerings, it is vital to be able to rely on the Federal Reserve for real-time payments just as he does for check, ACH, and wire transfer.
I appreciate the importance of community banks to the economic health of our communities, and I recognize the role of the Federal Reserve in enabling community banks to offer payment services on a competitive basis.
I am confident that by working together with all payment system stakeholders, we can collectively achieve widespread, safe, and efficient faster payments that will benefit all.
I am grateful to Susan Foley and Anjana Ravi of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Federal Reserve Actions to Support Interbank Settlement of Faster Payments (PDF) (August 5, 2019).
Lael Brainard, "Supporting Fast Payments for All" (remarks at the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Chicago, October 3, 2018).
Potential Federal Reserve Actions to Support Interbank Settlement of Faster Payments (PDF), Request for Comments, 83 Fed.
Phillips, A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunity: Nonbank Financials, Fintech, and Innovation (PDF) (Washington: U.S.
Government Accountability Office, Federal Reserve's Competition with Other Providers Benefits Customers, but Additional Reviews Could Increase Assurance of Cost Accuracy, GAO-16-614 (Washington: Government Accountability Office, August 2016).
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "The Federal Reserve in the Payments System" (Issued 1984; revised 1990).
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Principles for the Pricing of Federal Reserve Bank Services" (Issued 1980); and Board of Governors, "The Federal Reserve in the Payments System." Return to text
Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary Control Act of 1980, Pub.
Federal Reserve announces plan to develop a new round-the-clock real-time payment and settlement service to support faster payments

At "Bretton Woods: 75 Years Later—Thinking about the Next 75," a conference organized by the Banque de France and the French Ministry for the Economy and Finance, Paris, France
Seventy-five years ago this month, the foremost economic and policy minds of their generation gathered in a sleepy mountain town in New England.
While World War II still raged, they envisioned a new international monetary system with rules, procedures, and institutions—including the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the World Bank—to promote recovery and stability in a war-ravaged world.
The Bretton Woods institutions played a pivotal role after the war in rebuilding economies and in facilitating the international economic relations that are essential to prosperity.
Generations later, the World Bank and the IMF continue to play important roles in fostering global monetary cooperation, financial stability, and international trade, as well as in promoting sustainable economic growth and reducing poverty.
In 1944, those who sat around the table at the Mount Washington Hotel knew that the trauma and tragedy of the war and the Great Depression had fundamentally altered the economic systems that preceded them.
For us, around our dinner tables tonight, a decade has passed since the Global Financial Crisis.
I am grateful to the Banque de France for organizing this important event and to the outstanding speakers for their deep insights.
I will begin with a discussion of current economic conditions in the United States, and then highlight some significant structural changes in the environment facing monetary policymakers in the post-crisis era.
Finally, I will consider how these structural changes are affecting the framework in which we conduct monetary policy, highlighting the Federal Reserve System's ongoing review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications.
economy is now in its 11th consecutive year of growth.
Unemployment has steadily declined from its 10 percent post-crisis peak and has now remained at or below 4 percent for more than a year, the longest stretch in a half century.
A strong labor market with plentiful job openings has supported labor force participation.
Some groups, such as African Americans, Hispanics, and rural Americans, continue to face long-standing challenges, but the benefits of this strong job market are increasingly widely shared.
At outreach events we are holding across the United States, we are hearing loud and clear that this long recovery is now benefiting low- and moderate-income communities to a greater extent than has been felt for decades.
gross domestic product (GDP) increased at an annual rate of just over 3 percent in the first quarter, similar to last year's strong pace.
But first-quarter growth was driven largely by net exports and inventories—two volatile spending categories that are typically not dependable indicators of ongoing momentum.
Indeed, overall growth in the second quarter appears to have moderated.
Growth in consumer spending, which was soft in the first quarter, looks to have bounced back, but business fixed investment growth seems to have slowed notably.
Moreover, the manufacturing sector has been weak since the beginning of the year, in part weighed down by the softer business spending, weaker growth in the global economy, and, as our business contacts tell us, concerns about trade tensions.
Despite low unemployment and solid overall growth, inflation pressures remain muted.
After running close to the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) symmetric 2 percent objective over much of last year, both overall consumer price inflation and core inflation moved down earlier this year.
In our baseline outlook, we expect growth in the United States to remain solid, labor markets to stay strong, and inflation to move back up and run near 2 percent.
Uncertainties about this outlook have increased, however, particularly regarding trade developments and global growth.
FOMC participants have also raised concerns about a more prolonged shortfall in inflation below our 2 percent target.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation have shifted down, and some survey-based expectations measures are near the bottom of their historical ranges.
We are carefully monitoring these developments and assessing their implications for the U.S economic outlook and inflation, and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objective.
We will also assess these developments in the context of the broader structural changes monetary policymakers have been facing since the Great Recession.
In the United States, from the mid-1980s to right before the Great Recession, PCE inflation averaged 2.6 percent a year, GDP growth 3.4 percent, and the interest rate on a 10-year Treasury note 6.5 percent.
Since the trough of the Great Recession, average inflation and output growth are around 1 percentage point lower, and the 10-year Treasury rate has averaged 2.4 percent.
Average inflation rates for the other major advanced economies have declined by almost half, while the inflation rates of major emerging market economies are less than one-fifth of what they were.
In a number of countries, including the United States, these declines have been accompanied by strong labor markets and a much lower unemployment rate.
Such changes in the macroeconomic environment are significant because the long-run normal levels of inflation, output, interest rates, and the unemployment rate are important structural features by which we guide policy.
Standard estimates of the natural rate of unemployment—u*—and the neutral rate of interest—r*—have been declining for 2 decades, and particularly since the crisis.
Many factors are contributing to these changes—well-anchored inflation expectations in the context of improved monetary policy, demographics, globalization, slower productivity growth, greater demand for safe assets, and weaker links between unemployment and inflation.
If that happens, the neutral rate of interest will remain low, and policymakers will continue to operate in an environment in which the risk of hitting the effective lower bound is much higher than before the crisis.
This proximity to the lower bound poses new complications for central banks and calls for new ideas.
Trend inflation, productivity, and interest rates were declining well before the crisis.
But, for monetary policymakers in that era, the threat of high inflation felt proximate, the hard-fought battle to control high inflation having been just recently won.
Technological progress seemed likely to continue to sustain rapid increases in productivity—an outcome we continue to await.
And the effective lower bound for interest rates was mainly a theoretical concern, except of course in Japan.
The changes to the macroeconomic environment may have been in train earlier, but the crisis seems to have accelerated the process.
The world in which policymakers are now operating is discretely different in important ways from the one before the Great Recession.
I should also note, as is fitting given this event and this audience, that since the crisis policymakers are even more keenly aware of the relevance of global factors to our policies.
The global nature of the financial crisis and the channels through which it spread sharply highlight the interconnectedness of our economic, financial, and policy environments.
economic developments affect the rest of the world, and the reverse is also true.
For example, the stresses surrounding the euro crisis and, later, the China-related volatility events in 2015 and 2016 led to a general pullback in demand for risky assets that put downward pressure on U.S.
In addition, we have seen how monetary policy in one country can influence economic and financial conditions in others through financial markets, trade, and confidence channels.
Pursuing our domestic mandates in this new world requires that we understand the anticipated effects of these interconnections and incorporate them into our policy decisionmaking.
A second important feature of this new world is the tools central bankers now have to fight recessions.
In the face of the dramatic economic and financial collapse during the crisis, policymakers quickly exhausted conventional monetary policy tools and employed a range of unconventional measures to support their economies.
In the United States, these measures included new forms of forward guidance and a range of balance sheet policies.
Broadly across different economies, so-called unconventional monetary policies have generally been successful at lowering interest rates and supporting economic recovery, though cyclical and structural headwinds have made achieving our inflation targets a challenge.
We must continue to assess additional strategies and tools to bolster our economies and meet our inflation and employment mandates.
Finally, the crisis and Great Recession brought into stark relief the need for transparency and accountability for central banks.
It is important because clear, transparent communication about the economy, the risks, and our policy responses is critical for the effectiveness of our tools and for our accountability to the public in a democratic society.
It is challenging, because we are operating in a changing macroeconomic environment with tools that, while no longer new, remain less familiar to the public.
Gone are the days when the Federal Reserve Chair could joke, as my predecessor Alan Greenspan did, "If I turn out to be particularly clear, you've probably misunderstood what I said." 1 Central banks must speak to Main Street, as well as Wall Street, in ways we have not in the past, and Main Street is listening and engaged.
Where does this leave us, and how should policymakers adapt to this new environment? Recognizing challenges posed by the changing structure of the economy, the need for effective policy responses, and the importance of clear communication, central banks are taking a closer look at their strategies and the range of tools currently at their disposal.
For example, the Bank of Canada examines its framework every five years as part of the renewal of its inflation-control agreement with the federal government.
Canadian officials have announced the bank will "assess a broad range of monetary policy frameworks ahead of the renewal in 2021" of this agreement.2 The Bank of England commissioned a review over the past year of the future of the United Kingdom's financial system and what it might mean for the bank's agenda, toolkit, and capabilities.3 For our part, the Federal Reserve is conducting, for the first time, a public review of the strategy, tools, and communications that we use to promote our goals of maximum employment and price stability.4 The heart of this review has been a series of Fed Listens events around the country, in every Reserve Bank District, to hear directly from the constituencies we serve.
Last month, we hosted a research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago to explore ways to more effectively and sustainably achieve our mandated goals.
Other central banks, many represented in this room, are also looking deeply at the challenges posed by the current environment and assessing tools and strategies.
Tonight let us celebrate their success and strive so that our vision for the future of the global economic and financial system proves as durable and as effective.
See Alan Greenspan (1988), "Trade Deficit and Budget Deficit," C-SPAN video of a speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, June 14,  (quoted remark is 3 minutes, 20 seconds into the video).
See Bank of Canada (2018), "Bank to Review the Monetary Policy Framework ahead of 2021 Renewal, Says Senior Deputy Governor Wilkins," press release, November 20, (quoted text is in paragraph 1); and Carolyn A.
Wilkins (2018), "Choosing the Best Monetary Policy Framework for Canada," speech delivered at the McGill University Max Bell School of Public Policy, Montreal, November 20.
See Huw van Steenis (2019), "The Future of Finance Report," Bank of England, June 20.
Powell (2019), "Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy Review," speech delivered at the Council on Foreign Relations, New York, June 25.

In my time at the Federal Reserve, I have found that hearing directly from people around the country about how their communities are experiencing the economy is vital to carrying out my responsibilities.
It helps me to understand what is working well and what the challenges are, and it provides ideas on how to improve economic opportunities.
Today I look forward to hearing your perspective on the economy and the banking business in and around Scranton.
Consumer spending is robust, buoyed by the strong labor market and continued strong confidence.
Last week's strong jobs report provided reassurance that employment has continued to expand at a healthy pace.
Payrolls have risen at a 170,000 monthly pace over the past three months—more than enough to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force.
The unemployment rate remains near a 50-year low, wages are growing at a moderate pace, the percentage of prime-age adults who are employed is close to its pre-crisis peak, and claims have been hovering around historic lows.
Furthermore, financial conditions overall remain quite supportive of continued employment and output growth.
By contrast, capital spending by businesses has been lackluster, and indicators of business sentiment have been soft.
The recent G-20 summit provided a constructive change in tone about trade discussions, but business sentiment and investment plans will likely remain sensitive to uncertainty around trade and the global outlook.
Fiscal policy is also a source of uncertainty, with both the debt ceiling and the federal budget needing to be resolved.
Over the past year, inflation has fallen short of the Federal Reserve's 2 percent objective, and that has been the case more often than not in recent years.
On the one hand, that means the economy can continue to grow without pushing inflation too high.
On the other hand, inflation that runs too low for long periods can pose difficult challenges.
Below-target inflation reduces the amount of room the Federal Reserve has to cut the federal funds rate to cushion the economy from negative developments.
And it could lead people to lower their expectations for future inflation, which in turn could lead to an increasing shortfall of inflation from our objective.1 Indeed, some indicators of longer-run inflation expectations have been on the soft side in recent months.
Putting all of the pieces together, it appears the economy has been doing well so far this year, bolstered by confident consumers and a strong job market.
And after fluctuations earlier in the year, financial markets currently appear supportive of growth, with borrowing rates low and the stock market at all-time highs.
While the modal outlook is solid, the downside risks, if they materialize, could weigh on economic activity.
Taking into account the downside risks at a time when inflation is on the soft side would argue for softening the expected path of monetary policy according to basic principles of risk management.
Of course, my judgment about the actual path of policy will continue to be influenced by the evolution of the data and the risks.
We should be addressing these financial imbalances by activation of the countercyclical capital buffer, more rigorous use of stress tests, and active monitoring of leveraged lending.
So what does this mean for you and the families and businesses you serve in and around Scranton? I hope and expect that the progress you have made in transforming the region's economy will continue as the expansion extends into its 11th year.
You have had important success in attracting new logistics jobs to take advantage of Northeastern Pennsylvania's proximity to major cities.
You are making important investments in the forward-looking "eds and meds" (education and health-care) sectors by leveraging the 19 colleges and universities in and around Scranton.
The area's unemployment rate is close to its lowest level in the past 40 years.
I look forward to hearing from the community bankers gathered here today about the outlook for families and businesses in Northeastern Pennsylvania and how you are helping the region invest and grow.
And I am looking forward to continuing the discussions tomorrow, when I will visit with the Scranton Area Community Foundation to discuss the Northeastern Pennsylvania equitable transportation initiative, NEPA Moves, that is working on transportation solutions to connect residents with opportunity.
I also look forward to visiting the Cedar Avenue corridor with the United Neighborhood Centers of Northeastern Pennsylvania to hear about the resident-driven revitalization there.
The federal funds rate was close to zero for nearly seven years following the financial crisis, and it likely would return to zero in a downturn.
When nominal interest rates are zero, a drop in inflation expectations can be especially problematic, making the "real" interest rates that matter for household and business decisions higher than they would otherwise be and therefore less supportive of growth.

At "Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts
Thank you Eric, and thank you to everyone at the Boston Fed and throughout the system who have contributed to this conference.
This gathering comes a few weeks after the announcement of this year's stress test results, so let me begin by recounting the highlights of those results.
They show that our financial system remains resilient and that capital planning by banks continues to improve.
The largest and most complex banks were tested against a severe hypothetical recession and retained strong capital levels, well above their minimum requirements.
They demonstrated the ability to withstand a severe and lasting economic downturn and still be able to lend to households and businesses.
Additionally, most firms are now meeting the high expectations we have set to make sure capital planning takes into account their specific risks and vulnerabilities.
Overall, these results are good news that confirm our financial system is significantly stronger than before the crisis.
Now let me turn to the purpose of this conference, which is to sharpen our understanding of the experience gained from stress testing and apply these lessons to think about the future.
And let me begin by acknowledging that—notwithstanding our openness to learning from the collective experience of all of us in this room—the future of stress testing will, in a number of important ways, necessarily resemble the past.
Over the course of the last 18 months, I have heard overwhelmingly—from academics, from think tanks of every stripe, from banks of every size, from regulatory colleagues both domestic and foreign—that stress tests should continue to be a key element of the Federal Reserve's supervision of systemically important banks and a key aspect of the Fed's efforts to promote financial stability.
And the banks' performance on these tests will continue to be the most risk sensitive and consequential assessment of the affected banks' capital requirements.
Transparency around the stress testing process and results was a fundamental principle of the first stress test and every one that has followed, and it will remain a primary goal.
Stress tests, as ever, will provide the public with essential information to assess the health of banks and the overall financial system.
To be credible, stress tests will also continue to provide significant information about how the Fed does its work, so the public can understand the rigor and independence of our assessment process and how we come to our judgment of the firms we test.
Fidelity to these principles, embraced in the depths of the crisis by the first stress test a decade ago, does not mean that stress testing should never change or that it hasn't changed over the years.
These include a counterparty default scenario, as well as a number of policy statements that more explicitly convey the principles we find important in a sensible stress testing program.
Stress testing has evolved, and must continue to evolve, to take on what we as supervisors learn from our work and what we can learn from others.
Each year, we have refined both the substance and the process of the stress tests, guided by our own experience and by critiques and suggestions from others.
This feedback comes from a variety sources, including conferences such as this one, and I am confident that the presentations today will provide insights that result in improvements in our stress tests.
If stress tests are to continue to be relevant and effective, I strongly believe that they must continue to change: they must respond to changes in the economy, the financial system, and the risk-management capabilities of firms.
Evolutionary change has been a consistent principle of stress testing since the beginning, embraced by my predecessors at the Board of Governors and our supervisory staff and reflected in each cycle of tests.
Without such adjustments, regulators, banks, and the broader public cannot get a clear and dynamic view of the capital positions of the largest banks.
Stress tests each year have upheld the original principle of transparency around the capital adequacy of our largest banks.
Stress tests results should allow investors, counterparties, analysts and markets to make more informed judgments about the condition of banks.
Along with other regulatory measures, this transparency increases market discipline and it subjects the Federal Reserve to greater outside scrutiny and analysis.
Accountability is important not only for the usual reasons that apply in a democracy but also, in this case, because stress tests can only be effective when the public has confidence in the Fed's evaluation of the capital adequacy of banks.
In effect, stress tests are also a test of the Fed's supervision of large banks.
In these remarks, I will first sketch out how changes in regulation, risk management, the economy, and overall financial stability have prompted alterations to stress tests over the past decade.
Much of that change has enhanced transparency, which is a founding principle for stress tests.
I will then suggest some ways in which the effectiveness of stress testing can be further enhanced with greater transparency.
Ten years ago, in May of 2009, the Fed and the Treasury Department released the first stress test results under the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP).
The United States had lost an astonishing three million jobs in the previous four months.
The goal of the first test was urgent and simple: to restore confidence in the 19 large banks that then accounted for two-thirds of the assets in the banking system.
In fact, simply announcing in March that there would be tests helped stabilize bank finances.
That improvement continued after the results in May outlined the quite feasible steps for raising additional capital that the banks would need to take, and did take, to be able to continue lending if adverse conditions continued.
Challenging conditions did continue, but the stress tests and other actions taken in the first half of 2009 marked a turning point.
The recovery from the Great Recession began in July, as the financial system came back to life, and then steadily strengthened.
For the first time, an independent authority, the Federal Reserve, would seek to independently assess risks.1 Just as important, the details of that assessment would be shared with the public, an extent of transparency that until then wasn't characteristic of bank supervision but would become the hallmark of the regulatory framework erected in response to the crisis.
The first tests relied heavily on banks' internal risk models, but they still represented a huge step in independence in providing the public with an assessment of the health and resiliency of large banks.
The information provided to the public under the SCAP stress test reinforced the entire enterprise of estimating the capital shortfall faced by major banks.
It held the banks accountable for information on their capital adequacy and required them to fill the capital hole.
The next big step for stress testing came with its integration with the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR), beginning in 2011.
One big change from the initial SCAP test was that stress tests were no longer a one-time emergency measure intended to restore confidence in major financial institutions.
Second, stress tests were no longer a discretionary exercise by supervisors—under Dodd-Frank, they became the law of the land.
And third, when they were integrated into CCAR, stress tests became part of a comprehensive—it's the first C in CCAR—framework for capital planning that more closely connected capital regulation to risk management of banks and overall supervision.
Transparency was enhanced when stress tests became mandatory, recurring events and the public could depend on continuing to have access to information about banks' capital adequacy.
Further changes to stress testing have likewise reinforced the original goals.
Stress testing scenarios have become richer and more challenging, providing more information about how banks would deal with a range of adverse developments and, for example, exploring the effects of more differentiated risks that are not tied to the business cycle.
Large trading banks now face an instantaneous shock to their trading assets, and many participants in the stress tests now must address how they would respond to the failure of their largest counterparty.
Our stress tests demonstrate that banks have now built enough capital to withstand a severe recession.
The capital-building phase of the post-crisis era is now complete, but as part of CCAR, stress testing continues to contribute to the significant and ongoing improvement since 2009 in risk management by banks.
The original reason for the qualitative objection aspect of stress testing was to provide incentives for banks to address the risk-management shortcomings that the Federal Reserve had observed during the financial crisis.
For example, many firms supervised by the Federal Reserve had substantial deficiencies in their ability to measure, monitor, and manage their risks.
These shortcomings made it difficult for banks to accurately report their risk exposures to the Board, and consequently, threatened to undermine the credibility of the stress tests, which were, and remain, dependent on data from the banks.
Since the beginning of CCAR in 2011, large banks have significantly improved their risk-management and capital-planning processes.
The qualitative assessment conducted as part of the 2018 and 2019 CCAR cycles found that most firms either meet or are very close to meeting the Federal Reserve's supervisory expectations for capital planning.
Large banks have improved the methods they use to identify their unique risks, now use sound practices for identifying and addressing model weaknesses, and have strong processes in place to evaluate their capital positions on a forward-looking basis.
While we continue to perform a qualitative assessment and ensure that progress is retained, the improvements led the Federal Reserve to conclude that for most banks this assessment can be incorporated into our regular supervisory practices.
The evolution of our qualitative assessment reflects the experience of the past 10 years of stress testing, and in particular, the great improvement in risk management by large banks and the cumulative effect of the Fed's improved supervision of large institutions.
As I said earlier, for stress testing to remain effective, it must respond to changes in the economy, the financial system, and risk-management capabilities.
The changes to CCAR have occurred in the context of a similarly dramatic improvement in the strength and resilience of the financial system.
The firms have more than doubled their capital since the first round of stress tests in 2009.
Since that time, the common equity of the largest 18 firms has increased by more than $650 billion.
Let me now turn to the most recent changes to CCAR and stress testing and put them in the context of the history I have just related.
2155, yet the legislation it passed reaffirmed the important role of stress testing.
This shouldn't be surprising, because the experience of stress testing over the last 10 years has demonstrated that it is a highly useful element of large bank supervision and the promotion of financial stability.
Something else that shouldn't be surprising is that this experience has revealed that periodic stress testing has turned out to be a less useful supervisory tool to evaluate the risks of smaller and less complex financial institutions.
Congress made use of this experience by raising the threshold for stress testing to $100 billion in assets and providing more flexibility for the Fed to tailor stress testing for all firms.
This step has, once again, advanced the principles demonstrated in the first stress test and ever since.
It has increased transparency because incorporating and disclosing what we have learned about the varying effectiveness of stress testing at different types of institutions is making stress testing more effective.
The accountability of the Fed is enhanced when we are seen taking on board what we have learned through successive cycles of stress tests, and this strengthens the independence and credibility of our judgments.
For those of us who believe stress testing should remain central to supervision and promoting financial stability, it is vital that an adjustment such as this takes place as appropriate.
With that in mind, let me review recent changes and proposed changes to the Federal Reserve's stress testing.
These changes are designed to make CCAR more transparent and simple and to feature less unnecessary volatility.
We have taken a number of recent steps to enhance the transparency around our models and the stress testing process more generally.
Earlier this year, the Board published enhanced disclosures on two of the key models that we use in stress testing.
In addition, the Board published estimated loss rates for groups of loans with distinct characteristics, to show how supervisory models treat specific assets under stress.
We will publish disclosures about two additional models in 2020 and each year thereafter until we have provided transparency about all our stress test models.
At the same time, we published a new policy statement on our approach to supervisory stress testing.
Among other things, the statement emphasizes the importance of independence and stability to the credibility of our stress tests.
We are currently considering options to provide additional transparency regarding scenarios and scenario design and I expect that the Board will seek comment on the advisability of, and possible approaches to, gathering the public's input on scenarios and salient risks facing the banking system each year.
Some argue that the greater transparency and disclosure promoted by recent changes and proposed changes to stress testing amounts to providing banks with the answers to the tests.2 This both overstates the extent of disclosure involved and misunderstands what we are trying to accomplish in stress testing—goals that haven't changed since the spring of 2009.
If the measure of success for the Fed in administering a stress test was simply how many banks failed, then greater transparency would indeed be a mistake.
But that is not the purpose of stress testing, and it never has been.
The vitally important goal is to improve and sustain good risk management and capital planning at the individual institutions we supervise and to promote the stability of the financial system.
Like a teacher, we don't want banks to fail, we want them to learn.
In this case, we want them to learn good risk management in the context of forward-looking capital planning.
This will provide the public with more information about the capital planning of major banks, and about how the Federal Reserve views good capital planning and risk management, bolstering our credibility.
The second principle reflected in recent changes to stress testing is simplicity.
One important proposal—what we are calling the stress capital buffer—would simplify the Fed's large bank capital rule by integrating the stress testing process with our traditional regulatory capital rules.
Our regulatory capital rule includes both minimum capital requirements and a buffer that sits on top of those minimum requirements.
The buffer serves as an early warning to a firm and to supervisors, and it requires the firm to reduce its capital distributions as the firm approaches the minimum requirements.
Integrating these two standards is a natural evolution of CCAR away from its origins during the crisis, when such tailoring was impractical and policy makers had not yet considered the approach of a regulatory capital buffer on top of a regulatory capital minimum.
The stress capital buffer would result in a more transparent and simplified system of regulatory capital requirements because a firm will be held to a single, integrated capital regime.
The stress capital buffer would not reduce the stringency of the regulatory capital framework for large banks, but it would effect a substantial simplification of that framework.
By my math, the number of different capital requirements applicable to large banks would fall from 18 to eight and the number of different total loss absorbing capacity requirements for large banks would fall from 24 to 14.
I expect that we will move forward with a revised stress capital buffer proposal in the near future, reflecting many of the comments received on our original proposal.
The third principle addressed by the recent changes is volatility.
When I think about volatility in stress testing, I want to distinguish what I consider to be useful variation in the tests, in the form of exploration of salient risks, from what I consider to be less useful variation, in the form of unexpected swings in capital requirements that don't have any particular relationship to changing risks at individual firms.
In addition, one source of volatility in the tests comes from the fact that banks are forced to do their capital planning before they get the results of our tests.
This would not affect the overall stringency of the tests but, mathematically, would mean that no single year could have an outsized influence on the amount of capital that a bank is required to maintain.
The potential downsides to this approach include the reduced risk sensitivity that a bank may experience to a particular test and potential technical challenges associated with changes to a bank's balance sheet and earnings.
Bearing in mind these potential challenges, I believe more thinking and discussion of this issue would be fruitful.
With respect to the second concern, as I have said before, I believe it more rational and logical for firms to be able to plan for their capital needs with the benefit of the results of our tests.
Given the huge strides that the banks have made in their capital planning and in meeting our expectations, I view the risk of banks backsliding in this regard to be minimal because it would be evident in the next test.
Our capital-planning expectations will not decline, and we will continue to use the supervisory process to enforce these expectations.
It is my hope that greater transparency can play a role in other parts of our supervisory process—for example, by allowing other aspects of bank supervision to benefit from public input.
Greater transparency for supervision is in keeping with one of the biggest improvements to the regulatory framework and to stress testing since the financial crisis.
I believe the changes and proposed changes to stress testing that I have discussed today reinforce the founding principles of the first test, administered in the challenging and uncertain spring of 2009, and reflect what we have learned each year over the decade since then.
That process of learning and refining should and must continue in order to keep stress tests as relevant and effective as they have been in helping to reduce the chances of another severe crisis.
On May 7, 2009, the results of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program were announced by the Federal Reserve Board, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.

At "Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review," a research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts
The Federal Reserve is strongly committed to stress testing as a cornerstone of our bank supervisory and financial stability missions.
Stress testing is perhaps the most successful supervisory innovation of the post-crisis era.
But if stress tests are to continue to serve their critical function, they will need to evolve in the years ahead to keep pace with the ever-changing financial system, as they have since the first round of tests in 2009.
A little more than 10 years ago, the United States and the world teetered on the brink of economic catastrophe.
The announcement of forward-looking stress-testing results in May 2009 helped restore confidence and stabilize banks by providing a credible and independent picture of their finances.1 These original stress tests evolved into the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review, or CCAR, program, which has served to institutionalize capital planning by firms, and supervision by the Fed, as a forward-looking endeavor.
Since 2009, large banks have added more than $800 billion in common equity capital, giving them a much thicker cushion to deal with losses.
Banks have gotten much better at assessing and managing their risks, effectively tracking commitments across their organizations, anticipating capital needs, and planning for different scenarios.
The stress tests of the future—5 and 10 years from now—will need to continue to ensure that banks remain able, even in a severe downturn, to provide the credit that households and businesses depend on.
As financial institutions and the financial system evolve, stress testing will need to keep up.
Banks will need to be ready not just for expected risks, but for unexpected ones.
If the stress tests do not evolve, they risk becoming a compliance exercise, breeding complacency from both supervisors and banks.
We might also, inadvertently, encourage the development of a banking system where, over time, all banks would look much alike rather than the banking system we want and need, one with diverse institutions with different business models.
The purpose of today's gathering is to help us think about how to ensure the tests continue to foster a dynamic banking system, financial stability, and a healthy and growing economy.
We have invited a wide range participants—fellow regulators, bankers, analysts, academics, and community groups—with diverse perspectives.
Because we do not claim a monopoly on knowledge or wisdom, we have invited many who have disagreed with us in the past.
And I want to particularly thank all of the speakers, discussants, and other participants for helping us grapple with the challenges of ensuring that tomorrow's stress tests remain as effective and vigorous as they are today.
The stress tests were announced in February 2009, and the results were released in May 2009.
See, respectively, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and Office of Thrift Supervision (2009), "Agencies to Begin Forward-Looking Economic Assessments," joint press release, February 25; and Board of Governors (2009), "Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC Release Results of the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program," press release, May 7.

At the Council on Foreign Relations, New York, New York
It is a pleasure to speak at the Council on Foreign Relations.
I will begin with a progress report on the broad public review my Federal Reserve colleagues and I are conducting of the strategy, tools, and communication practices we use to achieve the objectives Congress has assigned to us by law—maximum employment and price stability, or the dual mandate.
The Fed is insulated from short-term political pressures—what is often referred to as our "independence." Congress chose to insulate the Fed this way because it had seen the damage that often arises when policy bends to short-term political interests.
Central banks in major democracies around the world have similar independence.
With unemployment low, the economy growing, and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective, this is a good time to undertake such a review.
Another factor motivating the review is that the challenges of monetary policymaking have changed in a fundamental way in recent years.
Interest rates are lower than in the past, and likely to remain so.
The persistence of lower rates means that, when the economy turns down, interest rates will more likely fall close to zero—their effective lower bound (ELB).
Proximity to the ELB poses new problems to central banks and calls for new ideas.
At the heart of the review are our Fed Listens events, which include town hall–style meetings in all 12 Federal Reserve Districts.
We also want to benefit from the insights of leading economic researchers.
We recently held a conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago that combined research presentations by top scholars with roundtable discussions among leaders of organizations that serve union workers, low- and moderate-income communities, small businesses, and people struggling to find work.
What have we heard? Scholars at the Chicago event offered a range of views on how well our monetary policy tools have effectively promoted our dual mandate.
We learned more about cutting-edge ways to measure job market conditions.
We heard the latest perspectives on what financial and trade links with the rest of the world mean for the conduct of monetary policy.
We heard scholarly views on the interplay between monetary policy and financial stability.
What we heard, loud and clear, was that today's tight labor markets mean that the benefits of this long recovery are now reaching these communities to a degree that has not been felt for many years.
All of this underscores how important it is to sustain this expansion.
The questions we are confronting about monetary policymaking and communication, particularly those relating to the ELB, are difficult ones that have grown in urgency over the past two decades.
That is why it is so important that we actively seek opinions, ideas, and critiques from people throughout the economy to refine our understanding of how best to use the monetary policy powers Congress has granted us.
Beginning soon, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) will devote time at its regular meetings to assess the lessons from these events, supported by analysis by staff from around the Federal Reserve System.
In the meantime, anyone who is interested in learning more can find information on the Federal Reserve Board's website.1
Let me turn now from the longer-term issues that are the focus of the review to the nearer-term outlook for the economy and for monetary policy.
So far this year, the economy has performed reasonably well.
Solid fundamentals are supporting continued growth and strong job creation, keeping the unemployment rate near historic lows.
Although inflation has been running somewhat below our symmetric 2 percent objective, we have expected it to pick up, supported by solid growth and a strong job market.
Along with this favorable picture, we have been mindful of some ongoing crosscurrents, including trade developments and concerns about global growth.
When the FOMC met at the start of May, tentative evidence suggested these crosscurrents were moderating, and we saw no strong case for adjusting our policy rate.
The crosscurrents have reemerged, with apparent progress on trade turning to greater uncertainty and with incoming data raising renewed concerns about the strength of the global economy.
Against the backdrop of heightened uncertainties, the baseline outlook of my FOMC colleagues, like that of many other forecasters, remains favorable, with unemployment remaining near historic lows.
Inflation is expected to return to 2 percent over time, but at a somewhat slower pace than we foresaw earlier in the year.
Last week, my FOMC colleagues and I held our regular meeting to assess the stance of monetary policy.
We did not change the setting for our main policy tool, the target range for the federal funds rate, but we did make significant changes in our policy statement.
Since the beginning of the year, we had been taking a patient stance toward assessing the need for any policy change.
We now state that the Committee will closely monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near its symmetric 2 percent objective.
The question my colleagues and I are grappling with is whether these uncertainties will continue to weigh on the outlook and thus call for additional policy accommodation.
Many FOMC participants judge that the case for somewhat more accommodative policy has strengthened.
But we are also mindful that monetary policy should not overreact to any individual data point or short-term swing in sentiment.
Doing so would risk adding even more uncertainty to the outlook.
We will closely monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook and will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion.

At the 2019 Interagency Minority Depository Institution and CDFI Bank Conference, Arlington, Virginia
I am very pleased to join you today for this discussion, which highlights the important role that minority depository institutions (MDIs) and Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFIs) play in their communities.
It is your presence in these communities and the services you offer that support local businesses, jobs, and economic growth.
I know this because before joining the Federal Reserve, I was a community banker in a small rural town and more recently served as Kansas' State Bank Commissioner.
I understand what it means to try to meet the financial needs of a community, whose needs are varied and can present unique challenges to a credit underwriter.
I remember working with a customer on a mortgage loan for less than $20,000 with a first-time homebuyer's credit to purchase a mobile home.
Some larger banks might not be able or even be interested in putting that together, but community bankers know how important this kind of service is to their lower-income customers.
I'm proud to bring that perspective to the Federal Reserve Board as the first governor to fill the role designated for someone with community banking experience.
One way to fulfill my responsibilities is by meeting with and listening closely to minority and community bankers, consumers, small business owners, and local leaders—all of the stakeholders with an interest in their communities.
MDIs and their staff play a key role, and I will use the knowledge we gain from these interactions to improve our work at the Federal Reserve.
We aim to help MDIs in three ways: by finding ways to ease your regulatory burden, by sponsoring valuable and actionable research on your contributions to your communities, and by seeking to better support you through outreach and hands-on technical assistance.
One of the most important ways to help MDIs is by reducing regulatory burden.
We are acting to implement provisions of a new law, S-2155, and reviewing comments on several proposals made in 2018 to ensure they do not unduly burden community banks.
Our community bank leverage ratio proposal would allow qualifying banks to opt out of a more complicated risk-based capital framework.
Other proposals include raising to $400,000 the threshold for when an appraisal is required for a residential real estate transaction and narrowing the Volcker rule to banks engaged in riskier activities.
We raised the threshold from $1 billion to $3 billion in assets for banks that could qualify for an 18-month examination cycle.
Further, we raised the asset threshold to $3 billion for the Small Bank Holding Company and Savings and Loan Holding Company Policy Statement.
This change, which exempts small holding companies from consolidated risk-based capital rules, fosters local ownership of small banks by allowing more banking companies with limited access to capital markets to use debt in bank acquisitions.
With respect to supervision, the Federal Reserve continues to tailor and reduce burden by conducting portions of examinations offsite for community banks that prefer that option.
The Bank Exams Tailored to Risk (BETR) program identifies low-risk or, conversely, high-risk activities within state member banks and appropriately streamlines or expands examination work programs commensurate with the identified risk.
This minimizes the burden for banks that are well managed and directs supervisory resources to higher-risk activities where they are most needed.
Related to regulatory burden is an important initiative, in concert with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, to identify healthy minority banking organizations capable of acquiring or merging with MDIs in troubled condition.
The Board and Reserve Banks also conduct valuable research on the impact of MDIs on underserved households and communities.
Through this biennial conference and several PFP conferences and outreach events each year, the Federal Reserve facilitates networking among MDI institutions.
District coordinators from each Federal Reserve Bank will serve on local exam teams during examinations, and collect feedback from MDIs on how the PFP can provide additional assistance.
District coordinators meet regularly with MDI management to discuss emerging issues and provide technical assistance, especially to those in troubled condition, to explain supervisory guidance, discuss challenges, and respond to management concerns and inquiries.
High-interest items include the Community Reinvestment Act, IT and cybersecurity, concentrations in commercial real estate, interest-rate risk, capital planning and rules, anti-money-laundering compliance, and third-party vendor management.
We want to help MDIs navigate supervisory and regulatory requirements.
To do that well, we want to continue to develop an open dialogue so we can better understand the challenges you face and how we can best help you wherever we have the ability to do so.
Personal contact and relationship building are important to community banking and, I believe, also to community bank oversight.
We engage is these efforts because your institutions are vital to your communities and to the American economy.
On behalf of the Federal Reserve, I'd like to once again thank you for the work you do in your communities and welcome you to this year's conference.

Fed Listens in Cincinnati: How Does Monetary Policy Affect Your Community?
At Policy Summit 2019: Connecting People and Places to Opportunity, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Cincinnati, Ohio
I want to thank my colleague, Loretta Mester, for inviting me to participate today, and it is a pleasure to participate in the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland's Policy Summit.1
The Federal Reserve is reaching out to communities around the country to hear how Americans are experiencing the economy day to day and to make sure we are carrying out the monetary policy goals assigned to us by the Congress in the most effective way we can.2
The Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve to use monetary policy to achieve maximum employment and price stability.
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)—the group at the Fed responsible for determining monetary policy—has announced that our goal is to keep inflation around 2 percent over time.
The maximum-employment part of our dual mandate means that the Congress has directed us to achieve the highest level of employment that is consistent with price stability.
Earlier this week, President Mester and I participated in the meeting of the FOMC, where we had the opportunity to share our views on the economy and policy.
My own assessment is that the most likely path for the economy remains solid.
Although the pace of payroll gains has moderated recently, unemployment is at a 50-year low, wages are growing, participation in the labor force has expanded, and unemployment insurance claims are at cycle lows.
Crosscurrents from policy uncertainty have risen since early May, crimping business investment plans, raising concerns in some financial market segments, and weighing on global growth prospects.
Foreign authorities are seeking additional policy space to address growth and inflation shortfalls.
In addition, recent indicators of inflation and inflation expectations have been disappointing, making it all the more important to sustain the economy's momentum.
The downside risks, if they materialize, could weigh on economic activity.
Basic principles of risk management in a low neutral rate environment with compressed conventional policy space would argue for softening the expected path of policy when risks shift to the downside.3
With recent indicators suggesting the expansion is continuing at a solid pace and unemployment at a 50-year low, inflation has not yet moved to our goal on a sustained basis.
In parallel, it is also vital that a central bank meets its inflation target on a sustained basis, which will provide more capacity to buffer the economy if it encounters headwinds.
We are undertaking our review to ensure we are well positioned to meet our goals for many years to come, especially in light of the way the economy is changing, which I have been referring to as the "new normal."4 There are a few key features of that new normal.
First, interest rates have stayed very low in recent years in the United States and in many other advanced economies, and it seems likely that equilibrium interest rates will remain low in the future.
Low interest rates present a challenge for traditional monetary policy in recessions.
In the past, the Federal Reserve has typically cut interest rates 4 to 5 percentage points in order to support household spending and business investment.
However, when equilibrium interest rates are low, we have less room to cut interest rates and less room to buffer the economy using our conventional tool.
Another big change in the economy is that inflation does not move as much with economic activity and employment as it has in the past, which is what economists mean when they say the Phillips curve is very flat.
A flat Phillips curve has important advantages: The labor market can strengthen a lot and pull many workers who may have been sidelined back into productive employment without an acceleration in inflation, unlike what we saw in the 1960s and 1970s.
On the other hand, today's low sensitivity of inflation to slack, along with the limited ability to cut interest rates in a recession, means it can be more difficult to achieve our 2 percent inflation objective on a sustainable basis.
The limited ability to cut interest rates could provide less ability to buffer the economy in a downturn, while the very flat Phillips curve could make it harder to boost inflation during an expansion.
And that could further compress policy space in a negative spiral.
As we have seen in other countries, if inflation consistently falls short of the central bank's objective, consumers, workers, and businesses start to expect lower inflation to continue.
Expectations of low inflation can create a self-fulfilling dynamic with actual inflation, making it even more difficult for the central bank to boost inflation.
And because inflation is reflected in nominal interest rates, that, in turn, can reduce the amount of policy space the central bank has available to prevent the economy from slipping into recession.
In fact, in recent years, central banks around the world have had to use a larger variety of policy tools than they have traditionally used to support the recovery.
Given the new normal of low equilibrium interest rates and low sensitivity of inflation to slack, it is prudent to assess how well various approaches worked both here and around the world, with a view to identifying the best ways to promote the goals the Congress assigned to us.
Earlier this month, we held a conference in Chicago where we heard from experts as well as community organizations, small businesses, labor organizations, and retirees.
One of the ideas discussed in Chicago is that the Federal Reserve should explicitly promise to "make up" for misses on inflation during a downturn.
The Federal Reserve could hold interest rates lower after a recession is over, perhaps by promising not to raise interest rates until inflation or the unemployment rate have reached particular levels.5 A related idea discussed in Chicago is average inflation targeting, meaning the Federal Reserve would aim to achieve its inflation objective, on average, over a longer period of time—perhaps over the business cycle.6 This approach could also have aspects of a makeup policy, depending on how it is designed.
There is some skepticism that a central bank would in fact prove able to support above-target inflation over a sustained period without becoming concerned that inflation might accelerate, and inflation expectations might rise too high.
At the Chicago conference, we also heard how difficult it can be to estimate with any precision the "maximum employment" leg of our dual mandate.7 There is no fixed destination point for maximum employment—no single number where we can be sure we are "there." Maximum employment is something that we must learn about by seeing how the job market is operating.
That is very different from the longer-run level of inflation, which central banks are presumed able to determine over time.
The Federal Reserve communicates with the public about monetary policy through a variety of channels.
Twice a year, the Federal Reserve submits a Monetary Policy Report to the Congress.
We heard in Chicago that most members of the public care a lot about the job market and the cost of credit, but they are not aware of our communications about monetary policy.8 Of course, the media plays an important role in communicating our monetary policy actions and how they affect the economy.
And the Congress, which plays an important role in overseeing the Fed, is a key audience as well.
Nonetheless, considering how we can provide greater visibility to the public about what we do will be one of the issues we will be considering as our policy review continues.
How is your community experiencing today's economy? Is everyone who wants a job able to get one? Can they get the necessary training? Are businesses finding it relatively easy to hire the workers they need? How does price inflation and wage growth affect you? What about the availability and cost of credit—whether to start or expand a small business, buy a car to get to work, or invest in owning a home or getting a degree? And are there ways we can better communicate with you? I look forward to hearing your views on these and other questions.
I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Clarida (2019), "The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices," speech delivered at the 2019 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York, February 22; and Jerome H.
Powell (2019), "Monetary Policy: Normalization and the Road Ahead," speech delivered at the 2019 SIEPR Economic Summit, Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California, March 8.
One reason for caution is the risk of building financial market imbalances, such as currently elevated levels of risky corporate debt.
In my view, it is better to address such financial imbalances by activation of our countercyclical capital buffer, rigorous use of stress tests, and beefed-up monitoring of leveraged lending than by monetary policy.
See Lael Brainard (2016), "The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, Illinois, September 12.
See Sharon Kozicki (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve: Discussion of Practical Considerations (PDF)," presentation at the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 5.
Svensson (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for the Federal Reserve (PDF)," paper prepared for the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices.
Haltiwanger (2019), "How Tight is the Labor Market? (PDF)" paper prepared for the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategies, Tools, and Communications Practices, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 5.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Panel 1: What Does Full Employment Look Like for Your Community or Constituency?" at the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 5; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Panel 2: Transmission of Monetary Policy to the Economy: Beyond the Headlines," at the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, June 5.

The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices
At the Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices (A Fed Listens Event), Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
Good morning, and welcome to day two of the Federal Reserve System Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices.1 I think you will have to agree that the presentations and discussion yesterday were uniformly thoughtful, substantive, and stimulating, and today we will have another impressive lineup of speakers and panelists addressing timely topics that are relevant to our review.
And let me convey on behalf of Chair Powell, the Board of Governors, and the Reserve Bank Presidents, a sincere and deep appreciation to all the participants on this program, especially the authors of the seven outstanding papers, for the time, thought, and energy that went into preparing their contributions.
Yesterday Professors Eberly, Stock, and Wright provided us with a thorough and thoughtful evaluation of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications since 2009.
They conclude that the policy tools that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) relied on—"level policy" and "slope policy," to use their terminology—helped restore the U.S.
economy to health and bring it close to the statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability assigned to us by the Congress.
As was noted several times yesterday, in recent years forecasters and policymakers have been surprised by the decline in the unemployment rate and the size of the sustained ongoing gains in payroll employment.
FOMC participants' estimates of the longer-run normal rate of unemployment in the Summary of Economic Projections illustrate this point—they have drifted lower over time as labor market conditions have improved and inflation has remained quiescent.2 The paper by Professors Abraham and Haltiwanger provided us with an innovative search-and-matching model to estimate labor market slack—which complements the standard estimates based on unemployment gaps and Phillips curve relationships.
On that same general topic, the panel discussion of national and community leaders moderated by Governor Brainard provided a valuable perspective on the labor market that could not otherwise be gleaned from the aggregate statistics we often consult.
macroeconomics courses, the United States is not a closed economy but is one of many nations engaged in global finance and economic commerce.
Professor Obstfeld's paper examined the ways that global economic integration affects inflation and the neutral rate of interest—or r*—and the role played by the U.S.
dollar in transmitting the Federal Reserve's monetary policy to other countries.
In our final session yesterday, Professors Cecchetti and Schoenholtz assessed the Federal Reserve's communication practices.
Based on interviews and conversations with market participants, academics, and former policymakers, Professors Cecchetti and Schoenholtz offered concrete suggestions for improving our most important communications vehicles.
Our program today will feature papers by Lars Svensson on alternative monetary policy strategies, by Eric Sims and Cynthia Wu on the policy toolkit, and by Anil Kashyap and Caspar Siegert on the interplay between financial stability considerations and monetary policy.
Our featured panel of national and community leaders moderated by President Rosengren will I'm sure offer valuable perspectives about how the monetary levers we pull and push affect communities, credit availability, and small businesses.
Aside from being an intellectually stimulating two days, how does this week's conference fit into the FOMC's review of its monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications? Let me describe briefly how the review is structured.
Over the past several months, the individual Reserve Banks have been hosting a series of Fed Listens events—seven so far including this conference—with at least five more to follow in coming months.
In Minneapolis, we listened to researchers discuss the distributional consequences of the economic cycle and of monetary policy.
In Boston, we heard from small businesses, labor leaders, and groups that work in underserved communities about the effects of the Fed's policymaking on New England residents.
In Richmond, a panel of local business and community leaders discussed the ways the Fed's monetary policy affects the regional economy.
In New York, panelists representing labor, local government, and community organizations offered their perspectives on the relative importance of the Fed's dual mandate goals.
As I and my Fed colleagues who have participated in these events will attest, they have provided us with valuable perspectives on the economy that we would not otherwise be able to glean from aggregate economic statistics.
In coming regularly scheduled meetings, the FOMC will undertake its assessment of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.
This assessment will be informed by what we've heard at this conference, by our listening sessions in the Federal Reserve Districts, and by the work of System staff.
When the Committee tackles important issues, we take the time for wide-ranging and candid discussions, and so I expect our deliberations will continue over several meetings for the remainder of this year.
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants.
In January 2009, when longer-run projections were added to the Summary of Economic Projections, the midpoint of the central tendency for the longer-run normal unemployment rate was 4.9 percent.
In March 2019, the median of the longer-run normal unemployment rate was 4.3 percent.
Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices (A Fed Listens Event)

At the "Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications Practices" sponsored by the Federal Reserve, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
This conference is part of a first-ever public review by the Federal Open Market Committee of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications.
We have a distinguished group of experts from academics and other walks of life here to share perspectives on how monetary policy can best serve the public.
We are closely monitoring the implications of these developments for the U.S.
economic outlook and, as always, we will act as appropriate to sustain the expansion, with a strong labor market and inflation near our symmetric 2 percent objective.
While central banks face a challenging environment today, those challenges are not entirely new.
In fact, in 1999 the Federal Reserve System hosted a conference titled "Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Environment." Conference participants discussed new challenges that were emerging after the then-recent victory over the Great Inflation.1 They focused on many questions posed by low inflation and, in particular, on what unconventional tools a central bank might use to support the economy if interest rates fell to what we now call the effective lower bound (ELB).
Even though the Bank of Japan was grappling with the ELB as the conference met, the issue seemed remote for the United States.
The conference received little coverage in the financial press, but a Reuters wire service story titled "Fed Conference Timing on Inflation Odd, but Useful" emphasized the remoteness of the risk.2 Participants at the conference could not have anticipated that only 10 years later, the world would be engulfed in a deep financial crisis, with unemployment soaring and central banks around the world making extensive use of new strategies, tools, and ways to communicate.
The next time policy rates hit the ELB—and there will be a next time—it will not be a surprise.
We are now well aware of the challenges the ELB presents, and we have the painful experience of the Global Financial Crisis and its aftermath to guide us.
And with the economy growing, unemployment low, and inflation low and stable, this is the right time to engage the public broadly on these topics.
The review has several parts, all of which are intended to open our monetary policy to critical examination.
Beginning later this year, the FOMC will devote time at a series of our regular meetings to assess lessons from these events, supported by staff analysis performed throughout the Federal Reserve System.
In the meantime, anyone who is interested in participating or learning more can find information on the Federal Reserve Board's website.3
For a reference point, at the time of the 1999 conference, the United States was eight years into an expansion; core inflation was 1.4 percent, and the unemployment rate was 4.1 percent—not so different from today.4 Macroeconomists were puzzling over the flatness of the Phillips curve, the level of the natural rate of unemployment, and a possible acceleration in productivity growth—questions that are also with us today.5
The big difference between then and now is that the federal funds rate was 5.2 percent—which, to underscore the point, put the rate 20 quarter-point rate cuts away from the ELB.
Since then, standard estimates of the longer-run normal or neutral rate of interest have declined between 2 and 3 percentage points, and some argue that the effective decline is even larger.6 The combination of lower real interest rates and low inflation translates into lower nominal rates and a much higher likelihood that rates will fall to the ELB in a downturn.
As the experience of the past decade showed, extended ELB episodes can be associated with painfully high unemployment and slow growth or recession.
Economic weakness puts downward pressure on inflation, which can raise real interest rates and reinforce the challenge of supporting needed job growth.
In addition, over time, inflation has become much less sensitive to tightness in resource utilization.
This insensitivity can be a blessing in avoiding deflation when unemployment is high, but it means that much greater labor market tightness may ultimately be required to bring inflation back to target in a recovery.
Using monetary policy to push sufficiently hard on labor markets to lift inflation could pose risks of destabilizing excesses in financial markets or elsewhere.
In short, the proximity of interest rates to the ELB has become the preeminent monetary policy challenge of our time, tainting all manner of issues with ELB risk and imbuing many old challenges with greater significance.
When nominal interest rates were around 4 or 5 percent, a low-side surprise of a few tenths on inflation did not raise the specter of the ELB.
Core inflation is currently running a bit below 2 percent on a trailing 12-month basis.
My FOMC colleagues and I must—and do—take seriously the risk that inflation shortfalls that persist even in a robust economy could precipitate a difficult-to-arrest downward drift in inflation expectations.
At the heart of the review is the evaluation of potential changes to our strategy designed to strengthen the credibility of our symmetric 2 percent inflation objective.
The Fed, like most major central banks, is insulated from short-term political pressures.
When policy rates reached the ELB during the crisis, central banks resorted to what were then new, untested tools to pursue their mandated goals.
These tools are no longer new, but their efficacy, costs, and risks remain less well understood than the traditional approaches to central banking.
My FOMC colleagues and I are committed to explaining why the use of these tools in the wake of the crisis was a prudent and effective approach to pursuing our congressional mandate and why tools like these are likely to be needed again.
Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective?
Are the existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded?
How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?
We believe our current policy framework is working well, and we have made no decisions about particular changes.
By the time of the 1999 conference, research was beginning to show that—in models, at least—such strategies could substantially reduce the unemployment and other costs of ELB spells.8 The simplest version goes like this: Suppose that a spell with interest rates near the ELB leads to a persistent shortfall of inflation relative to the central bank's goal.
But what if the central bank promised credibly that it would deliberately make up for any lost inflation by stimulating the economy and temporarily pushing inflation modestly above the target? In the models, the prospect of future stimulus promotes anticipatory consumption and investment that could greatly reduce the pain of being at the ELB.9 Policymakers discussed this reasoning in the wake of the crisis, but neither the Fed nor any other major central bank chose to pursue such a policy.10 Why? For makeup strategies to work, households and businesses must go out on a limb, so to speak, raising spending in the midst of a downturn.
In theory, they would do this based on their confidence that the central bank will deliver the makeup stimulus at some point—perhaps years in the future.
In models, great confidence in central bankers is achieved by assumption.
Research on makeup strategies has begun to grapple more seriously with the credibility questions.12 But important questions remain.
To achieve buy-in by households and businesses, a comprehensible, credible, and actionable makeup strategy will need to be followed by years of central bank policy consistent with that strategy.
In the United States, we used several different formulations of both forward guidance and large‑scale purchases of longer-term securities.13 While views differ on the effectiveness of these policies, with their use, the unemployment rate fell steadily and inflation expectations remained well anchored, outcomes that were favorable overall when viewed against the recoveries of many other advanced economies.
My own view is that these policies provided meaningful support for demand, but that they should not be thought of as a perfect substitute for our traditional interest rate tool.
But transparency also plays a central role in policy effectiveness through its effects on the expectations of households and businesses.
Of course, this was the major insight behind the transparency revolution in central banking over the past few decades.
Today, central banks publicly share a large and ever-increasing amount of information about policy.
But policymakers and commentators inside and outside central banks sometimes question whether all of the transparency adds up to effective communication.14
But we have been living in times characterized by large, frequent, unexpected changes in the underlying structure of the economy.15 In this environment, the most important policy message may be about how the central bank will respond to the unexpected rather than what it will do if there are no surprises.
Unfortunately, at times the dot plot has distracted attention from the more important topic of how the FOMC will react to unexpected economic developments.
"New Framework for Strengthening Monetary Easing: 'Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing with Yield Curve Control,' " (PDF) announcement, September 21.
"Monetary Policy in a New Era," (PDF) paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute of International Economics, Washington, October 12–13.
"Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment," (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February.
"The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy," (PDF) Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no.
"The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions," IMF Economic Review, vol.
"From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting," (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
"Fed Conference Timing on Inflation Odd, but Useful," Reuters News, October 20.
Roberts (2017), "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World," (PDF) Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
Monetary Policy Frameworks and the Effective Lower Bound on Interest Rates (PDF), Staff Report 877.
"Average Inflation Targeting," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Federal Reserve Communications: Survey Results." (PDF) Washington: Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy at Brookings, November.
"Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23–25.
"On Falling Neutral Real Rates, Fiscal Policy, and the Risk of Secular Stagnation," (PDF) paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Spring, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8.
Williams (2000), "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Real Implications of the Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
The proceedings of the conference were published in the November 2000 issue of Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.
The inflation rate referenced is the October 12-month percent change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures excluding food and energy.
The discussion of all these issues was centered on Fed Chair Alan Greenspan's (1998) "New Economy" hypothesis that the United States had undergone fundamental changes for the better, leading to the otherwise puzzling outcomes.
See, for example, the estimates of the neutral rate reported on the New York Fed's website at https://www.newyorkfed.org/research/policy/rstar.
For example, based on the Federal Reserve staff's Greenbook forecast, across forecasts prepared for 59 FOMC meetings between 1997 and 2004, one-third of the year ahead, four-quarter inflation forecast errors were 0.5 percentage point or greater in absolute value.
Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), for example, show that optimal policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during subsequent economic expansions.
The strategy in Reifschneider and Williams (2000), for instance, involves a central bank following a Taylor rule modified to make up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes.
Kiley and Roberts (2017) study a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during normal times to compensate for below-target inflation during ELB episodes.
Also see Bernanke (2017) for a strategy in which low inflation is made up if it occurs when the federal funds rate is at or near the ELB.
The Bank of Japan (2016) came closest, announcing in September 2016 an "inflation-overshooting commitment" (p.
For details on formulations used by the United States for forward guidance and large-scale purchases of longer-term securities as well as other references, see, for example, https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/bst_openmarketops.htm and https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/expiredtools.htm.
For example, Olson and Wessel (2016a) presented results of a survey of those who follow the Fed closely; in an op-ed (2016b), they noted that "Some 73 percent of academics said Fed communications helps the markets; only 44 percent of private-sector Fed watchers agreed." Return to text
For more on changes in the underlying structure of the economy, see Powell (2018).
Conference on Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices (A Fed Listens Event)

Financial Conduct Authority has intervened to preserve LIBOR's stability only through the end of 2021.
Despite that development, some continue to speculate that LIBOR can remain in production indefinitely.
The Federal Reserve convened the ARRC based on our concerns about the stability of LIBOR.
The ARRC was charged with providing the market with the tools that would be needed for a transition from LIBOR: an alternative rate that did not share the same structural instabilities that have led LIBOR to this point, a plan to develop liquidity in the derivatives market for this new rate so that cash users could hedge their interest rate risk, and models of better contract language that helped limit the risk from a LIBOR disruption.
With only two and a half years of further guaranteed stability for LIBOR, the transition should begin happening in earnest.
I believe that the ARRC has chosen the most viable path forward and that most will benefit from following it, but regardless of how you choose to transition, beginning that transition now would be consistent with prudent risk management and the duty that you owe to your shareholders and clients.
The ARRC's work began by focusing on creating a derivatives market for the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), its recommended alternative to U.S.
dollar LIBOR, because end users require derivatives markets to hedge their cash exposures.
As liquidity in these markets continues to develop, my hope is that many of you will avail yourselves of them to close out your LIBOR positions.
In the meantime, it will be crucial in ensuring global financial stability that everyone participate in the International Swaps and Derivatives Association's (ISDA) consultations on better fallback language for LIBOR derivatives and then sign the ISDA protocol so that these fallbacks apply to the legacy book of derivatives.
The ARRC's fallback recommendations represent a significant body of work on the part of a wide set of market participants and set out a robust and well-considered set of steps that expressly consider an end to LIBOR.2 I urge everyone to avail themselves of this work; it is, again, important for prudent risk management and your fiduciary responsibilities that you incorporate better fallback language.
But history may not view that decision kindly; after LIBOR stops, it may be fairly difficult to explain to those who may ask exactly why it made sense to continue using a rate that you had been clearly informed had such significant risks attached to it.
And make no mistake—as good as the fallback language may be, simply relying on fallback language to transition brings a number of operational risks and economic risks.
Firms should be incorporating these factors into their projected cost of continuing to use LIBOR, and investors and borrowers should consider them when they are offered LIBOR instruments.
If you do consider these factors, then I believe you will see that it is in your interest to move away from LIBOR.
In convening the ARRC, we have set a model of public-private sector cooperation to address a key financial stability risk.
At a recent roundtable on the LIBOR transition held by the Financial Stability Board, we heard calls from the private sector to provide greater clarity on regulatory and tax implications of the transition and also calls for a more "muscular" regulatory approach.
For example, the Federal Reserve is working with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission and other U.S.
Agency staff are developing proposed changes to the margin rules for non-cleared swaps to ensure that changes to legacy swaps to incorporate a move away from LIBOR, including adherence to the ISDA protocol, would not affect the grandfathered status of those legacy swaps under the margin rules.
The Federal Reserve's supervisory teams have already included a number of detailed questions about plans for the transition away from LIBOR in their monitoring discussions with large firms.
The Federal Reserve will expect to see an appropriate level of preparedness at the banks we supervise, and that level must increase as the end of 2021 grows closer.
Our supervisory approach will continue to be tailored to the size of institution and the complexity of LIBOR exposure, but the largest firms should be prepared to see our expectations for them increase.
As we consider the answers we have received from these firms, we will assess how our supervisory expectations for them should evolve in the coming year.
Let me address one additional point relating to our supervisory stress tests, in an effort to provide further clarity.
Some have recently claimed that the Federal Reserve's supervisory stress tests would penalize a bank that replaces LIBOR with SOFR in loan contracts by lowering projections of net interest income under stress.
As can be seen in our recently published enhanced descriptions of the supervisory stress-test models, the interest rate variables that drive projections of net interest income under stress are the yield on 10-year Treasury bonds, the yield on 3-month Treasury bills, and the 10-year triple-B corporate yield.3 That is, the supervisory projections of net interest income are primarily based on models that implicitly assume that other rates such as LIBOR or SOFR move passively with short-term Treasury rates.
Given these mechanics, choosing to lend at SOFR rather than LIBOR will not result in lower projections of net interest income under stress in the stress-test calculations of the Federal Reserve.
I want to applaud the members of the ARRC who are working hard to make sure this threat to financial stability is avoided.
Vice Chair for Supervision Quarles also serves as Chair of the Financial Stability Board.
The remarks represent his own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2019: Supervisory Stress Test Methodology (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, March), table 2, p.

At "Developments in Empirical Macroeconomics," a research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Washington, D.C.
I would like to use my time here to talk about a topic of interest to many central bankers and macroeconomists: the interaction of monetary policy and financial stability.
As you well know, monetary policy has powerful effects on financial markets, the financial system, and the broader economy.
Conversely, financial instability, by impairing the provision of credit and other financial services, can depress economic growth, cause job losses, and push inflation too low.
Accordingly, financial stability, through its effects on the Federal Reserve's dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and stable prices, must be a consideration in the setting of monetary policy.
Against this backdrop, a natural—yet quite complex—question is whether monetary policy should be used to promote financial stability.
At the same time, my sense is that the balance is clearly tilted toward the conclusion that macroprudential policies—through-the-cycle resilience, stress tests, and the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB)—may be better targeted to promoting financial stability than monetary policy.1
As you know, the economy, monetary policy, and financial stability are intertwined.
For example, the past three recessions were preceded by some combination of elevated asset prices, rapid increases in borrowing by businesses and households, and excessive risk-taking in the financial sector.
These financial vulnerabilities have amplified adverse shocks to the overall economy time and again.
My own assessment is that even though business debt is elevated, at least by some measures, overall financial stability risks are not, as the financial sector has substantial loss-absorbing capacity and is not overly reliant on unstable short-term funding.
Yet, even if the risk of financial system disruption does not seem high, it well remain true that if the economy weakens, some businesses may default on this debt, potentially leading to a contraction in investment, a slow-down in hiring, and possibly to an unusual tightening in financial conditions.
These concerns highlight how cyclical factors influencing monetary policy borrowers may overlap with financial stability considerations.
Let me begin by laying out how monetary policy can influence financial stability.
Monetary policy, operating primarily through adjustments in the level of short-term interest rates, has powerful effects on the entire financial system.
A more accommodative monetary policy lowers interest rates across the maturity spectrum.
The textbook result is that mortgage rates and corporate borrowing rates, among others, decline; equity prices rise; and the dollar exchange rate depreciates.
In other words, financial conditions broadly ease, spurring households to buy more and businesses to invest and hire, thereby supporting economic growth and price stability.2
Monetary policy, however, if too accommodative, may lead to a buildup of financial vulnerabilities.
For instance, low interest rates reduce the cost of borrowing, and so may prompt businesses and households to overborrow.
Low rates may lead to a speculative bubble by compressing risk premiums for assets—such as equity, corporate bonds, and housing—and potentially leading investors to extrapolate price gains into the future in a bout of irrational exuberance.
Low rates may also squeeze the profitability of financial intermediaries through narrow interest margins and other factors.
In turn, these intermediaries as well as investors that had promised fixed nominal rates of return—such as insurance companies and pension funds—may "reach for yield," or take on more credit or duration risk in their portfolios in order to maintain high returns.
Periods of excessive leverage, rapid credit growth, or buoyant credit market sentiment increase the risk to economic growth.3
These dynamics point to the possibility that accommodative monetary policy, while necessary to support activity during the early stages of an economic expansion, may also increase vulnerabilities in the financial system, especially if maintained for too long.
These vulnerabilities weaken the financial system's ability to absorb negative shocks, and so when a shock arrives, losses mount, the financial system weakens, lending slows, and economic activity slows by more than it would have otherwise, potentially leading to an economic downturn or a more severe recession.
These observations lead to the important question of whether and how financial vulnerabilities should affect the setting of monetary policy.
One simple framework for evaluating the tradeoffs associated with actively setting monetary policy to lean against the buildup of financial vulnerabilities is to examine the costs and benefits of such a policy in terms of unemployment and inflation.
In this approach, the costs of tightening monetary policy in response to a buildup of financial vulnerabilities are lower employment and potentially below target inflation in the near term.
The benefits are possibly reducing the risk of a future financial crisis, an event likely associated with a much larger fall in employment and inflation.
One view is that monetary policy curbs household and business borrowing only modestly but can boost the unemployment rate notably.
And so using monetary policy to damp borrowing does more harm than good.
According to this view, using monetary policy to lean against financial vulnerabilities does not generate significant net benefits and may be counterproductive—increasing unemployment and decreasing inflation below a desired level with little reduction in risks to financial stability.4
At the same time, some research has identified circumstances under which the benefits of using monetary policy to lean against financial vulnerabilities could outweigh the costs.5 A key consideration is the estimated amount of economic activity lost in a financial crisis—and some research suggests such losses may be quite large, which raises the benefits of leaning against imbalances.
Similarly, monetary policy may affect a broad range of financial imbalances—excessively high house or equity prices and leverage within the financial sector—and the full set of these effects could shift the risk of financial instability sufficiently, at least under some circumstances, to make leaning against financial vulnerabilities with monetary policy desirable.
The broader point is that we do not fully understand the cost–benefit tradeoff and whether monetary policy adjustments for financial stability reasons may be appropriate at some times.
Of course, there is one additional and critical factor to consider when weighing adjustments to the stance of monetary policy for financial stability reasons: the availability and efficacy of other instruments to promote financial stability.
Effective supervisory, regulatory, and macroprudential policy tools appear to be well placed to address financial vulnerabilities.
At the Federal Reserve, we have emphasized a set of structural, or through-the-cycle, regulatory and supervisory policies as our primary macroprudential tools to promote financial stability.
These measures include strong capital and liquidity requirements for banks, especially the largest and most systemic institutions.
In addition, our supervisory stress tests evaluate the ability of large banks to weather severe economic stress and the failure of their largest counterparty as well as examining the risk‑management practices of the firms.
Moreover, the stress-test scenarios are designed to generally be more severe during buoyant economic periods when vulnerabilities may build.
Furthermore, our stress tests consider the potential effects of specific risks we have identified in our financial stability monitoring work.
For example, the tests in recent years have included hypothetical severe strains in corporate debt markets, exploring the resilience of the participating banks to the risks associated with the increase in business borrowing.
In addition, the Federal Reserve monitors a wide range of indicators for signs of potential risks to financial stability that may merit a policy response, and we now publish a summary of this monitoring in our semiannual Financial Stability Report.
If vulnerabilities are identified as being meaningfully above normal, the Federal Reserve can require large banks to increase their loss-absorbing capacity through increases in the CCyB.6
First, central bankers' experience with macroprudential tools, including the CCyB, is limited.
Second, regulation and macropudential tools can reduce economic efficiency and hamper economic growth by limiting the ability of the market to allocate financial resources.
For this reason, the Federal Reserve has been evaluating ways in which our supervisory and financial stability goals can be achieved more efficiently, and it has been participating in global efforts to evaluate the effects of reforms under the auspices of the Financial Stability Board.
Third, macroprudential policies that are targeted to banks may create an incentive for financial intermediation to migrate outside of the regulated banking system.
The vulnerabilities may still emerge, albeit elsewhere in the financial system—perhaps in institutions or structures that are less stable and resilient than our banks.
To sum up, while there is evidence that financial vulnerabilities have the potential to translate into macroeconomic risks, a general consensus has emerged that monetary policy should be guided primarily by the outlook for unemployment and inflation and not by the state of financial vulnerabilities.
Financial system resilience, supported by strong through-the-cycle regulatory and supervisory policies, remains a key defense against financial system and macroeconomic shocks.
There is a clear need for new theory and empirics to address the questions about monetary policy and financial stability I have posed today.
I encourage you to continue to contribute to these answers.
By engaging the help of the wider academic community, conferences such as this one provide an invaluable opportunity to make progress on issues of great importance for economic policy.
"Monetary Policy, Financial Conditions, and Financial Stability," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Financial Stability and Optimal Interest Rate Policy," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Inside the Black Box: The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy Transmission," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
"How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M.
Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, 1st ed., vol.
"The Trade Offs in Leaning against the Wind," IMF Economic Review, vol.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.
"Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870–2008," American Economic Review, vol.
"Inflation Targeting and 'Leaning against the Wind,'" International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Cost–Benefit Analysis of Leaning against the Wind," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
For reviews of the various monetary policy transmission channels to the real economy, see Bernanke and Gertler (1995) and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010).
CCyB also builds financial-sector resilience during periods when financial vulnerabilities are high and there is a risk of potential losses within the banking sector that could strain the supply of credit.
Furthermore, the CCyB might be a more effective tool than monetary policy to mitigate financial vulnerabilities, as the benefits are comparable to those of using monetary policy while the costs are an order of magnitude smaller.

At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York
I have attended Economic Club of New York events many times over the years and have always enjoyed the programs that feature engaging speakers sharing important insights on timely topics.
economic expansion will become the longest on record—or at least the record since the 1850s, which is as far back as the National Bureau of Economic Research tracks U.S.
business cycles.2 In anticipation of that milestone, I would like to take stock of where the U.S.
economy is today, to assess its future trajectory, to review some important structural changes in the economy that have occurred over the past decade, and to explore what all of this might mean for U.S.
The Federal Reserve has a specific mandate assigned to it in statute by the Congress, which is the dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability.
As I speak today, the economy is as close to achieving both legs of this dual mandate as it has been in 20 years.
My colleagues and I understand that our responsibility is to conduct a monetary policy that not only is supportive of and consistent with achieving maximum employment and price stability, but also, once achieved, is appropriate, nimble, and consistent with sustaining maximum employment and price stability for as long as possible.
And thus, the title of my talk today is "Sustaining Maximum Employment and Price Stability."
Over the past four quarters, gross domestic product (GDP) growth has averaged 3.2 percent, which compares with an average growth rate of 2.3 percent since the recovery began in the summer of 2009.
By most estimates, fiscal policy played an important role in boosting growth in 2018, and I expect that fiscal policies will continue to support growth in 2019.
Over the same four quarters, the unemployment rate has averaged 3.8 percent, and the most recent reading, at 3.6 percent, is near its lowest level in 50 years.
Moreover, average monthly job gains have continued to outpace the increases needed to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force.
inflation remains muted—currently, it is somewhat below our 2 percent longer-run objective for the personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price deflator—and inflation expectations, according to a variety of measures, continue to be stable.
As we look ahead, in our March Summary of Economic Projections, the median projection of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants was for GDP growth of around 2 percent as the modal, or most likely, outcome over the next three years, for PCE inflation to rise to 2 percent, and for the unemployment rate to edge up to 3.9 percent by 2021.
Before I discuss the outlook for monetary policy, allow me to review some important structural changes that have taken place in the economy over the past decade that will be particularly relevant for our monetary policy decisions.
Perhaps the most significant structural change relevant to monetary policy is that the real, or inflation-adjusted, rate of interest consistent with full employment and price stability, often referred to as the neutral rate, or r*, appears to have fallen in the United States and abroad from more than 2 percent before the crisis to less than 1 percent today.3 The decline in neutral policy rates likely reflects several factors, including aging populations, higher private saving, a greater demand for safe assets, and a slowdown in global productivity growth.
The policy implications of the decline in neutral rates are important.
All else being equal, a lower neutral rate increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will reach its effective lower bound in a future economic downturn.
Such a development, in turn, could make it more difficult during a future downturn for monetary policy to provide sufficient accommodation to rapidly return employment and inflation to mandate-consistent levels.4
economy has been the steady decline in estimates of the structural rate of unemployment consistent with "maximum" employment, often referred to as u*.
This decline in u* may be due in part to higher educational attainment and a larger proportion of older workers in the workforce today relative to the workforce of past decades.5 If u* is lower than historical estimates suggest, this would imply that, even with today's historically low unemployment rate, the labor market would not be as tight—and inflationary pressures would not be as strong—as one would expect, based on historical estimates of u*.
I also note that the decline in the unemployment rate in recent years has been accompanied by a pronounced increase in labor force participation for individuals in their prime working years.6 It has also been accompanied since 2014 by a rise in labor's share of national income.
As I have documented previously, in the past several U.S.
business cycles, labor's share has risen as those expansions proceeded because workers command higher wages in a stronger labor market; notably, in those cycles, the rise in labor's share did not pass through to faster price inflation.7 The previously mentioned increase in prime-age labor force participation has provided employers with a source of additional labor input and has been one factor restraining inflationary pressures.
If so, then potential output could be higher than many current estimates suggest.
Over the past few years, we have also seen evidence of a pickup in U.S.
Indeed, as of the first quarter of this year, productivity in the nonfarm business sector rose 2.4 percent over the previous four quarters, its fastest pace since 2010 when the U.S.
By contrast, in both the 2001–07 and 1982–90 economic expansions, productivity growth was actually slowing relative to its average pace during those expansions.
That said, while identifying inflection points in trend productivity growth in real time is notoriously difficult, a pickup in trend productivity growth relative to the pace that prevailed earlier in the expansion is a possibility that we should not, I believe, dismiss.8
Another structural change relevant for monetary policy is that price inflation appears less responsive to resource slack than it did in the past.
That is, the short-run price Phillips curve appears to have flattened, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.9 A flatter Phillips curve is, in a sense, a proverbial double-edged sword.
It permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns—as was the case during and after the Great Recession—because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when the Phillips curve is flatter.10 However, a flatter Phillips curve also increases the cost, in terms of economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations.
Thus, a flatter Phillips curve makes it all the more important that longer-run inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.11
Textbook macroeconomics teaches us that understanding the economy and getting monetary policy right requires that we do our best to understand if—and if so, how—the forces of aggregate demand and supply are evolving relative to historical experience and the predictions of our models.
Notwithstanding robust growth in demand over these five quarters, PCE price inflation fell somewhat short of the Fed's 2 percent objective.
With this background, let me now turn to the outlook for U.S.
As I mentioned earlier, my colleagues and I on the FOMC understand that our priority today is to put in place policies that will help sustain maximum employment and price stability in an economy that appears to be operating close to both of our dual-mandate objectives.
In our most recent statements, we have indicated that "the Committee will be patient as it determines what future adjustments to the...federal funds rate may be appropriate to support" our dual-mandate objectives.12 What does this mean in practice? To me, it means that we should allow the data on the U.S.
I believe that the path for the federal funds rate should be data dependent in two distinct ways.13 Monetary policy should be data dependent in the sense that incoming data reveal at any point in time where the economy is relative to the ultimate objectives of price stability and maximum employment.
This information on where the economy is relative to the goals of monetary policy is an important input into interest rate feedback rules.
Data dependence in this sense is well understood, as it is of the type implied by a large family of policy rules, including Taylor-type rules, in which the parameters of the economy needed to formulate such rules are taken as known.
As a result, in the real world, monetary policy should be—and in the United States, I believe, is—data dependent in a second sense: Policymakers should and do study incoming data and use models to extract signals that enable them to update and improve estimates of r* and u*.
Consistent with my earlier discussion, in the Summary of Economic Projections, FOMC participants have, over the past seven years, repeatedly revised down their estimates of both u* and r* as unemployment fell and real interest rates remained well below previous estimates of neutral without the rise in inflation those earlier estimates would have predicted.
And these revisions to u* and r* appeared to have had an important influence on the path for the policy rate actually implemented in recent years.
In addition to u* and r*, another important input into any monetary policy assessment is the state of inflation expectations.
Indeed, I believe price stability requires that not only actual inflation be centered at our 2 percent objective, but also that expected inflation be equal to our 2 percent inflation objective.
Unlike realized inflation, inflation expectations themselves are not directly observable; they must be inferred from econometric models, market prices, and surveys of households and firms.
As I assess the totality of the evidence, I judge that, at present, indicators suggest that longer-term inflation expectations sit at the low end of a range that I consider consistent with our price-stability mandate.
Where does this leave us today? As I already noted, the U.S.
economy is in a very good place, with the unemployment rate near a 50-year low, inflationary pressures muted, expected inflation stable, and GDP growth solid and projected to remain so.
Moreover, the federal funds rate is now in the range of estimates of its longer-run neutral level, and the unemployment rate is not far below many estimates of u*.
Plugging these inputs into a 1993 Taylor-type rule produces a federal funds rate between 2.25 and 2.5 percent, which is the range for the policy rate that the FOMC has reaffirmed since our January meeting.
Most recently, the Committee judged at our May meeting that the current stance of policy remains appropriate, and that decision reflects our view that some of the softness in recent inflation data will prove to be transitory.
This judgment aligns with some private-sector forecasts, which now project PCE inflation to return to 2 percent by 2020.
However, if the incoming data were to show a persistent shortfall in inflation below our 2 percent objective or were it to indicate that global economic and financial developments present a material downside risk to our baseline outlook, then these are developments that the Committee would take into account in assessing the appropriate stance for monetary policy.
Since the beginning of the year, the FOMC has made several important decisions about how it will implement monetary policy and how it will conclude the process of normalizing the size of its balance sheet.
The FOMC decided at its January meeting to continue to implement monetary policy in a regime with an ample supply of reserves—a regime often referred to as a floor system.14 Such a system, which has been in place since late 2008, does not require the active management of reserves through daily open market operations.
Instead, with an ample level of reserves in the banking system, the effective federal funds rate will settle at or slightly above the rate of interest paid on excess reserves (IOER).15 This system has proven to be an efficient means of controlling the policy rate and effectively transmitting the stance of policy to a wide array of other money market instruments and to broader financial conditions.
The FOMC continues to view the target range for the federal funds rate as its primary means of adjusting and communicating the stance of monetary policy, although in doing so, we must and do take into account how our balance sheet size, composition, and trajectory impact broader financial conditions.
And as we stated in January, although adjustments in the target range for the federal funds rate are our primary tool for adjusting the stance of monetary policy, we are prepared to adjust the details of the plans for balance sheet normalization based on economic and financial developments.
At its March meeting, the Committee announced that it would slow the pace of the runoff of the securities holdings in its SOMA portfolio, and that it plans to cease balance sheet runoff entirely by September.16 Since starting the process of balance sheet normalization in 2017, the Federal Reserve's securities portfolio has shrunk by about $500 billion (roughly 2-1/2 percent of GDP) and the level of reserve balances has declined about $700 billion.
Consistent with our decision in March, we began to slow the pace of runoff of our balance sheet earlier this month.
When the process of normalizing the size of our balance sheet concludes in September, we expect that our reserves liabilities will, for a time, likely remain somewhat above the level necessary for an efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy.
If so, we plan after September to hold the size of our securities holdings constant for a while.
During this period, reserve balances will continue to decline gradually as currency and other nonreserve liabilities increase.
At the point that the Committee judges that reserve balances have declined to the level consistent with the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy, we plan to resume periodic open market operations to accommodate the normal trend growth in the demand for our liabilities.17
As balance sheet normalization has progressed, the effective federal funds rate has firmed relative to the IOER rate.
Last year, after the federal funds rate moved up closer to the top of the target range set by the FOMC, we made technical adjustments in our operations by lowering the IOER rate relative to the top of the target range by 5 basis points in June and then again in December to keep the federal funds rate well within its target range.
Since then, the effective federal funds rate has been trading close to the level where it began the year.
Before I conclude my prepared remarks, allow me to say a few words about our review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.18 While we believe that our existing approach to conducting monetary policy has served the public well, the purpose of this review is to evaluate and assess possible refinements that might help us best achieve our dual-mandate objectives on a sustained basis.
economy operating at or close to our maximum-employment and price-stability goals, now is an especially opportune time to conduct this review.
We want to ensure that we are well positioned to continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years.
Furthermore, the shifts in r* and u*, as well as the flattening of the Phillips curve that I discussed earlier, suggest that the U.S.
and foreign economies have evolved in significant ways relative to the pre-crisis experience.
The Federal Reserve System is currently conducting "town hall"-style Fed Listens events, in which we are hearing from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including business and labor leaders, community development advocates, and academics.
In addition, we are holding a System research conference next week at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago that will feature speakers and panelists from outside the Fed.
Building on both the perspectives we hear and staff analysis, the FOMC will conduct its own assessment of its monetary policy framework, beginning around the middle of the year.
The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges.
What I can say is that any refinements or more-material changes to our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and stable prices.
"Changing Labor Force Composition and the Natural Rate of Unemployment," Chicago Fed Letter 338.
"Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/15/230.
"Statement regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization," press release, January 30.
"Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?" Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.
"How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M.
Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol.
"The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy (PDF)," Occasional Paper Series 217.
"The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve (PDF)," speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19.
Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF), report prepared for the 2017 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3.
"Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
Economy and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 25.
Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Clearing House and the Bank Policy Institute Annual Conference, New York, November 27.
"Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
"Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott and Allan Timmermann, eds., Handbook of Economic Forecasting, vol.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," Journal of International Economics, vol.
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 19887.
"Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay? (PDF)" International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping? (PDF)" in World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.
"The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 25123.
"Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24.
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants.
For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).
monetary policy will be constrained by the effective lower bound and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).
More-educated workers and older workers both have lower structural unemployment rates, at least historically; see Aaronson, Hu, Seifoddini, and Sullivan (2015).
The box "The Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Individuals" in the Board's July 2018 Monetary Policy Report contains a discussion of recent developments in labor force participation rates for prime-age individuals; see Board of Governors (2018, pp.
For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).
One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010).
As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions.
Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.
See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy, and see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment.
Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation.
Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation.
Cecchetti and others (2017) show that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s.
These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.
For example, see the May 2019 FOMC statement at Board of Governors (2019c), p.1.
For discussions on the federal funds rate and data dependency, see Clarida (2018a, 2018b).
For information on monetary policy implementation and balance sheet normalization, see Board of Governors (2019a).
The offered rate on the Overnight Reverse Repo Facility is an additional administered rate used to control the level of the federal fund rate.
Specifically, we slowed the balance sheet runoff in May by reducing the cap for monthly redemptions of Treasury securities from $30 billion to $15 billion; see Board of Governors (2019b).
In contrast to the Federal Reserve's large-scale asset purchases conducted over recent years, these periodic technical open market operations would not have any implication for the stance of monetary policy; rather, such operations would be aimed at maintaining a level of reserve balances in the banking system consistent with efficient and effective policy implementation.

At "Mapping the Financial Frontier: What Does the Next Decade Hold?” 24th Annual Financial Markets Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Amelia Island, Florida
It is a pleasure to be here at this important annual event sponsored and organized by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's Center for Financial Innovation and Stability.
This evening, I will focus on the implications of the increase in business debt over the past decade and review the steps the Federal Reserve and other agencies are taking to understand and limit the associated risks.
To preview my conclusions, as of now, business debt does not present the kind of elevated risks to the stability of the financial system that would lead to broad harm to households and businesses should conditions deteriorate.
At the same time, the level of debt certainly could stress borrowers if the economy weakens.
The Federal Reserve continues to assess the potential amplification of such stresses on borrowers to the broader economy through possible vulnerabilities in the financial system, and I currently see such risks as moderate.
The Fed and other regulators are using our supervisory tools and closely monitoring risks from the buildup of risky business debt.
Business debt has clearly reached a level that should give businesses and investors reason to pause and reflect.
If financial and economic conditions were to deteriorate, overly indebted firms could well face severe strains.
However, the parallels to the mortgage boom that led to the Global Financial Crisis are not fully convincing.
Most importantly, the financial system today appears strong enough to handle potential business-sector losses, which was manifestly not the case a decade ago with subprime mortgages.
And there are other differences: Increases in business borrowing are not outsized for such a long expansion, in contrast to the mortgage boom; business credit is not fueled by a dramatic asset price bubble, as mortgage debt was; and CLO structures are much sounder than the structures that were in use during the mortgage credit bubble.
Could the increase in business debt pose greater risks to the financial system than currently appreciated? My colleagues and I continually ask ourselves that question.
We are also taking multiple steps to better understand and address the potential risks.
regulatory agencies, both domestically through the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC) and internationally through the Financial Stability Board (FSB), we are monitoring developments, assessing unknowns, and working to develop a clearer picture.
We are also using our supervisory tools to hold the banks we supervise to strong risk-management standards.
And we are using our stress tests to ensure banks' resilience even in severely adverse business conditions.
Many measures confirm that the business sector has significantly increased its borrowing as the economy has expanded over the past decade.
Business debt relative to the size of the economy is at historic highs.
And because interest rates are quite low by historical standards, the costs of servicing today's higher levels of debt remain low relative to business income (figure 2).
Despite crosscurrents, the economy is showing continued growth, strong job creation, and rising wages, all in a context of muted inflation pressures.
But if a downturn were to arrive unexpectedly, some firms would face challenges.
Not only is the volume of debt high, but recent growth has also been concentrated in the riskier forms of debt.
Over time, the balance between the two has swung back and forth because of investor demand, the interest rate environment, and other factors.
As a result, investors may react to financial stress by trying to redeem their shares before the funds have sold their most liquid assets.
As with the mortgage boom, the business debt story begins with rapid growth of debt to new highs and a surge in lending to risky borrowers made possible by aggressive underwriting using securitization vehicles.
One difference is that financial authorities now closely monitor financial stability vulnerabilities on an ongoing basis, armed with lessons learned from the crisis.
The Board of Governors meets at least four times a year to assess threats to the financial system and is constantly monitoring developments.
We use a checklist of potential financial vulnerabilities that we have described elsewhere, most recently in the Financial Stability Report we published earlier this month.1 This approach gives us a way to organize and weigh the mass of facts, anecdotes, and speculation we confront as we monitor financial stability.
In assessing financial stability risks, we constantly consult our four-point checklist: borrowing by businesses and households, valuation pressures, leverage in the financial system, and funding risk.
Valuation pressures give us a sense of overall risk appetite and, should investors lose that appetite, how far prices could fall.
If lenders face defaulting borrowers and have too little loss-absorbing capacity, they risk insolvency.
At best, they will cut back on lending to other borrowers, dragging the economy down.
At worst, they will fail, which can lead to severe economic damage to households and businesses.
Finally, when the financial system funds long-maturity assets with short-maturity liabilities, we risk a classic "fast burn" crisis—a bank run, or its equivalent involving investors and institutions outside traditional banking.2
In our framework, the story of the mid-2000s goes something like this: Amid a self-reinforcing cycle of house price gains and mortgage credit expansion, households borrowed (and lenders lent) far too much, and property prices rose far too high.
Financial institutions of all shapes and sizes also borrowed too much.
And the financial sector was highly susceptible to a run because it funded risky, long-maturity mortgages with extended chains of fragile and opaque financing structures that ultimately rested on short-maturity liabilities.
But the growth in the ratio of business debt to GDP in the past decade is much less than the growth in household debt to GDP that we saw in the run-up to the Global Financial Crisis.
Overall, the increase in business debt relative to the size of the economy is one-third the increase in household debt seen in the previous decade.
The mortgage credit boom was, because of its magnitude and speed, far outside historical norms.3
All of these developments point to strong risk appetite—as might be expected given the strong economy.
But there does not appear to be a feedback loop between borrowing and asset prices, as was the case in the run-up to the financial crisis.
Regarding the third factor—leverage in the financial system—today banks at the core of the financial system are fundamentally stronger and more resilient.
Our post-crisis regulatory framework is based on robust capital requirements backed by strong stress tests, resulting in much higher levels of capital in the banking system (figure 6).
These stress tests are a way to estimate the direct and indirect effects of extremely bad macroeconomic and financial developments on our banking system.
Since we began routine stress-testing in 2011, the scenarios we use have featured severe global recessions characterized by major stress in the corporate sector, where large numbers of firms default on their loans and bonds.
As actual economic conditions have improved, the scenarios have gotten tougher.
The most recent stress tests indicate that, even after the losses from the scenario, capital levels at the largest banks would remain above the levels those banks had before the crisis.
Loss-absorbing capacity elsewhere in the financial system is also much improved.
As for our fourth factor—funding risk—the susceptibility of the financial system to runs also appears low.
In part because of the post-crisis regulatory regime, large banks hold substantial amounts of highly liquid assets and rely relatively little on short-term wholesale funding (figure 7).
And CLOs, which have facilitated the growth of leveraged loans, have stable funding: Investors commit funds for lengthy periods, so they cannot, through withdrawals, force CLOs to sell assets at distressed prices.
Overall, vulnerabilities to financial stability from business debt and other factors do not appear elevated.
We take the risks from business debt seriously but think that the financial system appears strong enough to handle potential losses.
We also know that our dynamic financial system does not stand still.
Together with our domestic and international counterparts, we are monitoring developments in business debt markets, working to develop and share data on how these markets operate, studying ways to further strengthen the system, and working to ensure that banks are properly managing the business debt risks they have taken on.
Through the FSOC, the banking and market regulators coordinate our monitoring of financial conditions.
For example, the Securities and Exchange Commission is examining the potential for liquidity strains at mutual funds, and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission is working to understand the use of derivatives to hedge risks associated with leveraged loans.
What else are we watching for? Business debt growth has moderated somewhat since early 2018, but this might be just a pause.
Businesses, investors, and lenders need to focus on these vulnerabilities—as will the Federal Reserve.
In addition, regulators, investors, and market participants around the world would benefit greatly from more information on who is bearing the ultimate risk associated with CLOs.
CLO market spans the globe, involving foreign banks and asset managers.
But right now, we mainly know where the CLOs are not—only $90 billion of the roughly $700 billion in total CLOs are held by the largest U.S.
That is certainly good news for domestic banks, but in a downturn institutions anywhere could find themselves under pressure, especially those with inadequate loss-absorbing capacity or runnable short-term financing.
The Federal Reserve is participating in international efforts, under the auspices of the FSB, to improve our knowledge of these key issues.
Through the FSB, we are focused on determining the size of the global leveraged loan market and the holders of the loans as an important step toward a better understanding of the underlying risks.
Beyond monitoring markets and collecting new data, several supervisory efforts are also under way.
To complement the quantitative analysis in our stress tests, our supervisors have been qualitatively assessing how well banks are managing the risks associated with leveraged lending.
Through the Shared National Credit Program, which evaluates large syndicated loans, our supervisors are continuing to work with their counterparts at the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to ensure that banks are properly managing the risks of losses they face from participating in the leveraged lending market.
As a result, some businesses may come under severe financial strain if the economy deteriorates.
A highly leveraged business sector could amplify any economic downturn as companies are forced to lay off workers and cut back on investments.
Investors, financial institutions, and regulators need to focus on this risk today, while times are good.
The debt-to-GDP ratio has moved up at a steady pace, in line with previous expansions and neither fueled by nor fueling an asset bubble.
Moreover, banks and other financial institutions have sizable loss-absorbing buffers.
The growth in business debt does not rely on short-term funding, and overall funding risk in the financial system is moderate.
Third, we cannot be satisfied with our current level of knowledge about these markets, particularly the vulnerability of financial institutions to potential losses and the possible strains on market liquidity and prices should investors exit investment vehicles holding leveraged loans.
This commitment includes coordination with other domestic and international agencies to understand who is participating in business lending and how their behavior could potentially amplify stress events.
An Assessment of the Long-Term Economic Impact of Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements (PDF).
"Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability: Exploring the Nexus," (PDF).
"Monetary Policy and the Global Housing Bubble," Economic Policy, vol.
"An Empirical Economic Assessment of the Costs and Benefits of Bank Capital in the US," (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-034.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April.
"The Great Mortgaging: Housing Finance, Crises and Business Cycles," Economic Policy, vol.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June.
Assessing the Macroeconomic Impact of the Transition to Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements (final report) (PDF).
"Credit Booms Gone Bust: Monetary Policy, Leverage Cycles, and Financial Crises, 1870–2008," American Economic Review, vol.
For research on the role of credit, house prices, and other factors as indicators for potential financial instability, see Borio and Lowe (2002); Schularick and Taylor (2012); Jordà, Schularick, and Taylor (2016); and Kiley (2018).
For research on the role of bank capital, see Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010); Macroeconomic Assessment Group (2010); and Firestone, Lorenc, and Ranish (2017).
For an analysis of the degree to which housing market developments in the 2000s appeared unrelated to economic fundamentals and references to related research, see Dokko and others (2011).

The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices
At "Fed Listens: A Capstone Roundtable" hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York
I am pleased to attend this Fed Listens event providing the New York perspective for the Federal Reserve's review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.1 We are bringing open minds to our review and are seeking a broad range of perspectives.
To us, it simply seems like good institutional practice to engage with a wide range of interested individuals and groups as part of a comprehensive approach to enhanced transparency and accountability.2
The Congress charged the Federal Reserve with achieving a dual mandate—maximum employment and price stability—and this review will take this mandate as given.
We will also take as given that a 2 percent rate of inflation in the price index for personal consumption expenditures is the operational goal most consistent with our price-stability mandate.
economy operating at or close to our maximum-employment and price-stability goals, now is an especially opportune time for this review.
The unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective.
We want to ensure that we continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years.
In addition, we will evaluate the new policy tools and enhanced communication practices the Federal Reserve deployed in response to the Global Financial Crisis and the Great Recession.
and foreign economies have evolved significantly since before the crisis.
Perhaps most importantly, neutral interest rates appear to have fallen in the United States and abroad.3 This global decline in neutral rates is widely expected to persist for years and likely reflects several factors, including aging populations, changes in risk-taking behavior, and a slowdown in technology growth.
These factors' contributions are highly uncertain, but, irrespective of their precise role, the policy implications of the decline in neutral rates are important.
All else being equal, a fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will reach its effective lower bound in future economic downturns.
That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to support household spending, business investment, and employment and keep inflation from falling too low.4
Another key development in recent decades is that inflation appears less responsive to resource slack, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.5 This change is, in a sense, a proverbial double-edged sword.
It permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns—as was the case during and after the Great Recession—because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when inflation is less responsive to employment conditions.6 However, that dynamic also increases the cost, in terms of economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations.
Thus, it is all the more important that longer-run inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.7
Finally, the strengthening of the labor market in recent years has highlighted the challenges of assessing the proximity of the labor market to the full employment leg of the Federal Reserve's dual mandate.
The unemployment rate, which stood at 3.6 percent in April, has been interpreted by many observers as suggesting that the labor market is currently operating beyond full employment.
However, the level of the unemployment rate that is consistent with full employment is not directly observable and thus must be estimated.
The range of plausible estimates likely extends at least as low as the current level of the unemployment rate.
For example, in the March Blue Chip economic outlook survey, the average estimate of the natural rate of unemployment for the bottom 10 respondents was 3.9 percent, as compared with 4.7 percent for the highest 10 respondents.8
The decline in the unemployment rate in recent years has been accompanied by a pronounced increase in labor force participation for individuals in their prime working years.9 These increases in participation have provided employers with a significant source of additional labor input and may be one factor restraining inflationary pressures.
As with the unemployment rate, whether participation will continue to increase in a tight labor market remains uncertain.
The strong job gains of recent years also has delivered benefits to groups that have historically been disadvantaged in the labor market.
For example, African Americans and Hispanics have experienced persistently higher unemployment rates than whites for many decades.10 However, those unemployment rate gaps have narrowed as the labor market has strengthened, and there is some indication of an extra benefit to these groups as the unemployment rate moves into very low territory.11 Likewise, although unemployment rates for less-educated workers are persistently higher than they are for their more-educated counterparts, these gaps appear to narrow as the labor market strengthens.12 And wage increases in the past couple of years have been strongest for less-educated workers and for those at the lower end of the wage distribution.13
Our monetary policy review will have several components.14 The Board and the Reserve Banks are hosting Fed Listens events—such as this one in New York—in which we are hearing from, among others, business and labor leaders, community development advocates, and academics.
Next month, we are holding a System research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with speakers and panelists from outside the Fed.
The program includes overviews by academic experts of themes that are central to the review.
Building on the perspectives we hear and on staff analysis, the Federal Open Market Committee will perform its own assessment of how it conducts monetary policy, beginning around the middle of the year.
The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges.
What I can say is that any changes to our conduct of monetary policy that we might make will be aimed solely at improving our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today.
"Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?" (PDF) paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7-8.
"Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications," (PDF) IMF Working Paper WP/5/230.
"Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?" Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.
"How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M.
Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol.
"The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy," (PDF) Occasional Paper Series 217.
"The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve," (PDF) speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19.
"Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle," (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June.
Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF), report prepared for the 2017 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3.
"Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
"Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds., Handbook of Economic Forecasting, vol.
"Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework?" (PDF) paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13–14.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," Journal of International Economics, vol.
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World," (PDF) Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate," (PDF) NBER Working Paper Series 19887.
"Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay?" (PDF) International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping?" (PDF) in World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.
"The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123.
"Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities," FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25.
"Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24.
Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework.
For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).
monetary policy will be constrained by the effective lower bound and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).
The apparent diminished responsiveness of inflation to resource slack is known in economic research as a flattening of the short-run Phillips curve.
For evidence of this flattening in the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).
One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010).
As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions.
Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.
See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment.
Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation.
Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation.
Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s.
These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.
The box "How Tight Is the Labor Market?" in the Board's February 2018 Monetary Policy Report contains a discussion of some indicators that can be used to assess labor market tightness; see Board of Governors (2018a, pp.
The box "The Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Individuals" in the Board's July 2018 Monetary Policy Report contains a discussion of recent developments in labor force participation rates for prime-age individuals; see Board of Governors (2018b, pp.
See Cajner and others (2017) for a careful examination of how labor market differentials by race and ethnicity have evolved over time.
See Aaronson and others (2019) for evidence on the relative behavior of unemployment rates by race and ethnicity in a strong labor market.
The authors find similar patterns for labor force participation rates and for employment-to-population ratios.
Disparities in labor market outcomes are also evident between urban and rural areas of the United States.
However, these gaps have not narrowed as the labor market has strengthened.
The box "Employment Disparities between Rural and Urban Areas" in the Board's February 2019 Monetary Policy Report examines these disparities in more detail; see Board of Governors (2019, pp.
Wage gains for workers with different wage levels and with different levels of education can be calculated using data from the Current Population Survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The Economic Policy Institute (2019) provides convenient tabulations of these data.

The Federal Reserve’s Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices
At "Fed Listens: Education, Employment, and Monetary Policy in the Third District" hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
I am pleased to participate in this event, part of the listening tour that Reserve Banks are hosting around the country and a key input into the Federal Reserve's review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.1 We are bringing open minds to our review and are seeking a broad range of perspectives.
To us, it simply seems like good institutional practice to engage with a wide range of interested individuals and groups as part of a comprehensive approach to enhanced transparency and accountability.2
President Harker already mentioned the Federal Reserve's statutory goals of maximum employment and price stability.
We will also take as given that a 2 percent rate of inflation in the price index for personal consumption expenditures is the operational goal most consistent with our price-stability mandate.
That said, based on the experience of other central banks that have undertaken similar reviews, our review is more likely to produce evolution, not a revolution, in the way we conduct monetary policy.
economy operating at or close to our maximum-employment and price-stability goals, now is an especially opportune time for this review.
The unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective.
We want to ensure that we continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years.
and foreign economies have evolved significantly since before the Global Financial Crisis.
The review will afford us the opportunity to evaluate the new policy tools and enhanced communication practices the Federal Reserve deployed in response to the crisis and the recession that followed it.
Listening sessions—such as today's—give us an opportunity to hear from the people and communities affected by monetary policy.
Next month, we are holding a System research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with academic experts and panelists from outside the Fed.
Building on the perspectives we hear and on staff analysis, the Federal Open Market Committee will perform its own assessment of how it conducts monetary policy, beginning around the middle of the year.
The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges.
What I can say is that any changes to our conduct of monetary policy that we might make will be aimed solely at improving our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today.
Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework.
See Jeffrey Fuhrer, Giovanni Olivei, Eric Rosengren, and Geoffrey Tootell (2018), "Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework?" (PDF) paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13–14.

The Disconnect between Inflation and Employment in the New Normal
At "Certain Uncertainty: Tax Policy in Unsettled Times" National Tax Association 49th Annual Spring Symposium, Washington, D.C.
Just as it may take the tax experts and practitioners here today some time to disentangle the longer-term implications of recent major changes to tax policy, so, too, we are in the process of analyzing the lessons for monetary policy of apparent post-crisis changes in the relationships among employment, inflation, and interest rates.1
The Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve the job of using monetary policy to achieve maximum employment and price stability.
Price stability means moderate and stable inflation, which the Federal Reserve has defined to be 2 percent inflation.
Maximum employment is understood as the highest level of employment consistent with price stability.
In the aftermath of the Great Recession, which had deep and persistent effects, it is important to understand whether there have been long-lasting changes in the relationships among employment, inflation, and interest rates in order to ensure our policy framework remains effective.
This expansion will soon become the longest on record in the United States.
Growth has persisted throughout the past decade, overcoming downdrafts from abroad and pullbacks in fiscal support earlier in the expansion and benefiting last year from a large fiscal boost.
At 3.6 percent, the unemployment rate is now lower than it was before the crisis.
At 80 percent, the employment rate for workers in their prime working-age years—a more comprehensive measure of slack that includes shifts in labor force participation as well as unemployment—has recently risen close to its pre-crisis level.
In contrast, the picture on inflation is puzzling this far into an expansion.
Despite the strengthening of the labor market, the measure of core inflation excluding volatile food and energy prices did not move up to 2 percent on a sustained basis until last year, and in the most recent reading, the 12-month change has moved down to 1.6 percent.
The Dallas Fed's trimmed mean measure of inflation, which provides a different way to filter out idiosyncratic movements in various components of inflation, has increased 2 percent in the past 12 months, slightly higher than its level of 1.9 percent for the two previous years.2
Since the Great Recession, there have been several changes in macroeconomic relationships, which I refer to as the new normal.3 Now is a good time to assess the characteristics of the new normal and what they mean for monetary policy.
The emerging contours of today's new normal are defined by low sensitivity of inflation to changes in labor market slack, a low long-term neutral rate of interest, and low underlying trend inflation.
In today's new normal, price inflation has not moved up consistently as the labor market has strengthened considerably over the course of the long expansion.
This is what economists mean when they say the Phillips curve is very flat: The historical relationship between resource slack and price inflation appears to have broken down.4 Although wage growth has been moving progressively higher as labor market slack has diminished, broader price inflation has remained muted.
Another important feature of today's new normal is that the long-run neutral interest rate seems to be lower than it was historically.
The neutral rate of interest refers to the level of the federal funds rate that would maintain the economy at full employment and 2 percent inflation if no tailwinds or headwinds were buffeting the economy.
The decline in the neutral rate likely reflects a variety of forces globally, such as the aging of the population in many large economies, some slowing in the rate of productivity growth, and increases in the demand for safe assets.
When one looks at the Federal Reserve's Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), it is striking that over the past five years, since the SEP interest rate projections first became available, the median estimate of the long-run federal funds rate has declined 1-1/2 percentage points, from 4‑1/4 percent to 2-3/4 percent.
Going back further to the two decades before the crisis shows a similar decline in today's long-run neutral rate relative to earlier Blue Chip consensus forecasts of the long-run federal funds rate.5
Third, underlying trend inflation—the trend in inflation after filtering out idiosyncratic and transitory factors—appears to be somewhat below the Federal Reserve's goal of 2 percent.
This raises the risk that households and businesses could come to expect inflation to run persistently below the Federal Reserve's target and could change their behavior in a way that reinforces that expectation.
Expectations are an important determinant of actual inflation because wage and price behavior by businesses and households is partly based on expectations of future inflation.
While low inflation and low interest rates have many benefits, the new normal presents a challenge for the conventional approach to monetary policy, in which the Federal Reserve could rely on changes in the level of the federal funds rate to achieve its inflation and employment goals.
In past recessions, the Federal Reserve has typically cut interest rates by 4 to 5 percentage points in order to support household and business spending and hiring.
With the long-run neutral rate low and with underlying trend inflation somewhat below target, nominal interest rates are likely to remain below those levels, which therefore leaves less room to cut rates as much as needed.
With less room to ease financial conditions and support economic activity using our conventional policy tool, the economy may endure prolonged periods during and after recessions with short-term interest rates pinned at their effective lower bound.
That, of course, was what happened following the financial crisis, when the Federal Reserve kept interest rates close to zero from December 2008 through November 2015.
That constraint limits the Federal Reserve's ability to provide stimulus through its conventional tool and thus could tend to leave inflation lower than it would otherwise be, and unemployment higher.
The experience of several years with the federal funds rate pinned at its effective lower bound and actual inflation below our target could weigh on expectations for future inflation and thereby influence the behavior of households and businesses that helps determine wages and prices.
The experience of a sustained period of low inflation could depress underlying trend inflation by feeding into lower inflation expectations, further reducing nominal interest rates and the space to cut interest rates in what could become a downward spiral.6 So we need to be especially careful to preserve as much of our conventional policy space as we can, while exploring mechanisms to augment the effectiveness of our framework.7
With subdued inflation, the sustained expansion has drawn workers back into the labor market after a damaging recession.
The unemployment rate is approaching a 50-year low, and the overall labor force participation rate has remained constant despite the long-term aging of the population that would otherwise be pushing participation lower.
Like the overall unemployment rate, broader measures of labor market slack are also lower than their pre-crisis levels.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics' U-6 measure shows that two groups have recently shrunk to pre-crisis levels after rising considerably during the recession: those working part time who would prefer full-time employment and people marginally attached to the labor force who have looked for work in the previous year but stopped looking more recently.
The strong labor market is leading to employment gains among workers with disabilities.
As labor markets have tightened, employers in certain sectors, occupations, and areas of the country report they are loosening requirements and investing more in training.
That means today's economy is providing opportunities for workers who might previously have been left on the sidelines—including those with records of past incarceration or who lack a particular certification or degree.
Given that the large majority of working-age households, those at the middle and lower ends of the income distribution, rely primarily on wage income, advancing our employment mandate has served the country well.
In today's new normal, with the low responsiveness of inflation to labor market tightness, there appears to be little evidence so far of a tradeoff with our price-stability objective.
The sustained strengthening of the labor market also adds to the productive capacity of the economy by attracting people on the sidelines to join or rejoin the labor force and move into employment.
The past three downturns were precipitated not by rising inflation pressure, but rather by the buildup of financial imbalances.
Extended periods of above-potential growth and low interest rates tend to be accompanied by rapid credit growth and elevated asset valuations, which tend to boost downside risks to the economy.9 It is not hard to see why a high-pressure economy might be associated with elevated financial imbalances, especially late in the cycle.
Profits tend to rise, experienced loss rates on loans are low, and people tend to project recent trends into the future, which leads financial market participants and borrowers to become overly optimistic.
Risk appetite rises, asset valuations become stretched, and credit is available on easier terms and to riskier borrowers than earlier in the cycle when memories of losses were still fresh.
Historically, when the Phillips curve was steeper, inflation tended to rise as the economy heated up, which naturally prompted the Federal Reserve to raise interest rates.
In turn, the interest rate increases would have the collateral effect of damping increases in asset prices and risk appetites.
With a flat Phillips curve, inflation does not rise as much as resource utilization tightens, and, accordingly, provides less necessity for the Federal Reserve to raise rates to restrictive levels.
At the same time, low interest rates along with sustained strong economic conditions are conducive to increasing risk appetites prompting reach-for-yield behavior and boosting financial excesses late in an expansion.
With the forces holding down interest rates likely to persist, valuation pressures and risky corporate debt, such as leveraged lending, could well remain at elevated levels.
Elevated valuations and corporate debt could leave the economy more vulnerable to negative shocks.
The market volatility in December is a reminder of how sensitive markets can be to downside surprises.
A key implication of the weakening in the relationship between inflation and employment, then, is that we should not assume monetary policy will act to restrain the financial cycle as much as previously.
With financial stability risks likely to be more tightly linked to the business cycle than in the past, it may make sense to take actions other than tightening monetary policy to temper the financial cycle.
In order to enable monetary policy to focus on supporting the return of inflation to our symmetric 2 percent target on a sustained basis along with maximum employment, we should be looking to countercyclical tools to temper the financial cycle.
One tool other central banks have been using to help temper the financial cycle is the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB).
The CCyB provides regulators with the authority to require large banks to build up an extra capital buffer as financial risks mount.10 Although the CCyB was authorized as part of the post-crisis package of reforms, so far, the Federal Reserve has chosen not to use it.
Moreover, because the CCyB is explicitly countercyclical, it is intended to be cut if the outlook deteriorates, boosting the ability of banks to make loans when extending credit is most needed and providing a valuable signal about policymakers' intentions.
This feature proved to be valuable in the United Kingdom in the wake of the Brexit referendum.
If countercyclical tools and other regulatory safeguards are not adequate over the cycle, monetary policy will need to carry a greater burden in leaning against financial excesses.
That would be unfortunate, because adding financial stability concerns to the burden of conventional monetary policy might undermine sustained achievement of our employment and inflation goals.
Because the financial cycle is today likely to be tempered less than in the past by material increases in interest rates as the economy expands, the appropriate level of bank capital for today's conditions is unlikely to be the same as in past business cycles: Because interest rates likely will do less than in past cycles, regulatory buffers will need to do more.
As a consequence, now is a bad time to be weakening the core resilience of our largest banking institutions or to be weakening oversight over the nonbank financial system.
Instead, we should be safeguarding the capital and liquidity buffers of banks at the center of the system, carefully monitoring risks in the nonbank sector, and making good use of the countercyclical tool that we have.
One hypothesis for the flat Phillips curve is that central banks have been so effective in anchoring inflation expectations that tightening resource utilization is no longer transmitted to price inflation.11 Another possibility is that structural factors such as administrative changes to health care costs, globalization, or technological-enabled disruption have been dominant in recent years, masking the operation of cyclical forces.12 Regardless, because inflation is ultimately a monetary phenomenon, the Federal Reserve has the capacity and the responsibility to ensure inflation expectations are firmly anchored at—and not below—our target.
As I have argued in the past, the fact that inflation has been running somewhat below our longer-run goal of 2 percent may not be entirely due to labor market slack or to transitory shocks; it also likely reflects some softening in inflation's underlying trend.13 First, estimates of underlying inflation based on statistical filters are lower than they were before the financial crisis and are currently below 2 percent.
Second, estimates of longer-run inflation expectations based on the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers and on inflation compensation from financial market pricing are also running lower than before the financial crisis.14
Our goal now is to get underlying trend inflation around our target on a sustained basis.
Although there is no one widely agreed-upon method of measuring underlying inflation, one statistical approach that has received attention in recent years captures the idea that underlying inflation responds to the experience with actual inflation, and that this responsiveness varies over time.15 We can use such an approach to get an idea of how much, and how quickly, underlying inflation might respond to any particular path for actual inflation.
It provides some reassurance that our goal may be achievable if inflation moves only slightly above 2 percent for a couple of years.
The SEP inflation projections of Committee members suggest that many have, over the past year or so, envisaged a few years of a mild overshoot.16
Of course, it is not entirely clear how to move underlying trend inflation smoothly to our target on a sustained basis in the presence of a very flat Phillips curve.
One possibility we might refer to as "opportunistic reflation" would be to take advantage of a modest increase in actual inflation to demonstrate to the public our commitment to our inflation goal on a symmetric basis.17 For example, suppose that an unexpected increase in core import price inflation drove overall inflation modestly above 2 percent for a couple of years.
The Federal Reserve could use that opportunity to communicate that a mild overshooting of inflation is consistent with our goals and to align policy with that statement.
Such an approach could help demonstrate to the public that the Committee is serious about achieving its 2 percent inflation objective on a sustained basis.
In today's new normal, it is important to achieve inflation and inflation expectations around our 2 percent target on a sustained basis while guarding against financial imbalances through active use of countercyclical tools.
We want to be mindful of the risk of financial imbalances that could amplify any shock and help tip the economy into recession, which the Federal Reserve has less conventional space to address in today's low interest rate environment.
In my view, it is therefore wise to proceed cautiously, helping to sustain the expansion and further gains in employment and with appropriate regulatory safeguards that reduce the risk of dangerous financial imbalances.
I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Koenig (2019), "Two Measures of Core Inflation: A Comparison," (PDF) Working Paper Series 1903 (Dallas: Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, February).
See Lael Brainard (2016), "The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, September 12.
See Lael Brainard (2015), "Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the 57th National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C.
For evidence that the Phillips curve may steepen when unemployment is low, see Peter Hooper, Frederic S.
Mishkin, and Amir Sufi (2019), "Prospects for Inflation in a High Pressure Economy: Is the Phillips Curve Dead or Is It Just Hibernating?" paper presented at the U.S.
See Lael Brainard (2015), "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1.
Roberts (2017), "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World," (PDF) Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
Williams (2019), "Tying Down the Anchor: Monetary Policy Rules and the Lower Bound on Interest Rates," (PDF) Staff Report 887 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May).
Bernanke (2017), "Monetary Policy in a New Era," (PDF) paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 12–13.
Roberts (2019), "Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February).
Wilcox (2019), "Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy?" (PDF) paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8.
See Tobias Adrian, Nina Boyarchenko, and Domenico Giannone (2019), "Vulnerable Growth," American Economic Review, vol.
Kiley (2018), "Unemployment Risk," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-067 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).
See Lael Brainard (2018), "Assessing Financial Stability over the Cycle," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, December 7.
For evidence that inflation expectations may have played a role in flattening the Phillips curve, see Damjan Pfajfar and John M.
Roberts (2018), "The Role of Expectations in Changed Inflation Dynamics," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-062 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August).
For a discussion of cyclical and acyclical inflation, see Tim Mahedy and Adam Shapiro (2017), "What's Down with Inflation?" (PDF) FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-35 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November).
For a specific discussion of the role of medical-care costs, see Jeffrey Clemens, Joshua D.
Gottlieb, and Adam Hale Shapiro (2016), "Medicare Payment Cuts Continue to Restrain Inflation," (PDF) FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-15 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, May).
For a discussion of common global factors, see Matteo Ciccarelli and Benoit Mojon (2010), "Global Inflation," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.
For a discussion of the role of technology, see Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (2018), "Technology-Enabled Disruption: Implications for Business, Labor Markets and Monetary Policy," conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, May 24–25.
See Lael Brainard (2017), "Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5; and Lael Brainard (2018), "Navigating Monetary Policy as Headwinds Shift to Tailwinds," speech delivered at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, March 6.
The Michigan survey's measure of inflation expectations recently moved down to its all-time low.
Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
Their model allows the responsiveness of underlying inflation to actual inflation to vary over time and suggests that responsiveness—the "gain"—has been lower in recent years than in the 1970s and 1980s.
See the Federal Open Market Committee's September 2018 SEP, an addendum to the minutes of the September 25–26, 2018, FOMC meeting, in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, September 25–26, 2018," press release, October 17.
Rudebusch (2000), "Opportunistic and Deliberate Disinflation under Imperfect Credibility," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
Wilcox (2002), "The Opportunistic Approach to Disinflation," International Finance, vol.

The Federal Reserve’s Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices
At "New England Perspectives on Fed Policymaking: A 'Fed Listens' Conference" hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts
I am pleased to attend this Fed Listens event providing a New England perspective for the Federal Reserve's review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.1 We are bringing open minds to our review and are seeking a broad range of perspectives.
To us, it simply seems like good institutional practice to engage with a wide range of interested individuals and groups as part of a comprehensive approach to enhanced transparency and accountability.2
The Congress charged the Federal Reserve with achieving a dual mandate—maximum employment and price stability—and this review will take this mandate as given.
We will also take as given that a 2 percent rate of inflation in the price index for personal consumption expenditures is the operational goal most consistent with our price-stability mandate.
That said, based on the experience of other central banks that have undertaken similar reviews, our review is more likely to produce evolution, not a revolution, in the way we conduct monetary policy.
economy operating at or close to our maximum-employment and price-stability goals, now is an especially opportune time for this review.
The unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective.
We want to ensure that we continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years.
In addition, we will evaluate the new policy tools and enhanced communication practices the Federal Reserve deployed in response to the Global Financial Crisis and the Great Recession.
and foreign economies have evolved significantly since before the crisis.
Perhaps most importantly, neutral interest rates appear to have fallen in the United States and abroad.3 This global decline in neutral rates is widely expected to persist for years and likely reflects several factors, including aging populations, changes in risk-taking behavior, and a slowdown in technology growth.
These factors' contributions are highly uncertain, but, irrespective of their precise role, the policy implications of the decline in neutral rates are important.
All else being equal, a fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will reach its effective lower bound in future economic downturns.
That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to support household spending, business investment, and employment and keep inflation from falling too low.4
Another key development in recent decades is that inflation appears less responsive to resource slack, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.5 This change is, in a sense, a proverbial double-edged sword.
It permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns—as was the case during and after the Great Recession—because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when inflation is less responsive to employment conditions.6 However, that dynamic also increases the cost, in terms of economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations.
Thus, it is all the more important that longer-run inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.7
Our monetary policy review will have several components.8 The Board and the Reserve Banks are hosting Fed Listens events—such as this one in Boston—in which we are hearing from, among others, business and labor leaders, community development advocates, and academics.
Next month, we are holding a System research conference at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with speakers and panelists from outside the Fed.
The program includes overviews by academic experts of themes that are central to the review.
Building on the perspectives we hear and on staff analysis, the Federal Open Market Committee will perform its own assessment of how it conducts monetary policy, beginning around the middle of the year.
The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges.
What I can say is that any changes to our conduct of monetary policy that we might make will be aimed solely at improving our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today.
"Inflation and Activity—Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications," (PDF) IMF Working Paper WP/5/230.
"Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?" Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.
"How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M.
Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol.
"The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy," Occasional Paper Series 217.
"The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve," speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19.
Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF), report prepared for the 2017 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3.
"Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit," (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
"Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy," (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds., Handbook of Economic Forecasting, vol.
"Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework?" (PDF) paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13–14.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," Journal of International Economics, vol.
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (PDF), Spring, pp.
"Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate," (PDF) NBER Working Paper Series 19887.
"Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay?" (PDF) International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping?" (PDF) in World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.
"The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123.
"Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24.
Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework.
For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).
monetary policy will be constrained by the effective lower bound and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).
The apparent diminished responsiveness of inflation to resource slack is known in economic research as a flattening of the short-run Phillips curve.
For evidence of this flattening in the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).
One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010).
As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions.
Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.
See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment.
Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation.
Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation.
Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s.
These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.

At "Renewing the Promise of the Middle Class" 2019 Federal Reserve System Community Development Research Conference, Washington, D.C.
It is good to be here at the Federal Reserve System's Community Development Research Conference.
From a purely economic perspective, being middle class commonly means having financial security and the ability to invest for our futures and for our children.
So a strong middle class is often seen as a cornerstone of a vibrant economy and, beyond that, a resilient democracy.2
Today I will share with you findings from a promising new data resource developed by Federal Reserve staff, the Distributional Financial Accounts (DFAs).
These accounts combine household-level data on balance sheets, incomes, and demographic characteristics of families in the United States from the triennial Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) with aggregate data from the Financial Accounts of the United States to track the distribution of these household assets and liabilities on a quarterly basis.4 The timeliness of the data, which are currently available through the fourth quarter of 2018, can provide valuable insights into how different types of households are faring over the business cycle.
Let us start by taking a look at how the wealth of middle-income households has evolved over recent years.6 Over the past three decades, the wealth of middle-income households increased an average of about 1 percent per year, adjusted for inflation (figure 1).7 That compares with average annual growth of 2.6 percent in real gross domestic income over this period.
On average, households at all levels of income lost wealth as a result of the declines in asset prices and rise in unemployment during the crisis (figure 2).
Having sketched out the contours of the overall level and growth of wealth owned by middle-income households, let us now turn to economic security.
Basic financial security is one important marker of the middle class.
Wealth is an important source of economic resilience for households, allowing them to handle unexpected expenses as well as providing them with the financial security to manage the usual changes in income over a lifetime.
By drawing from several household surveys conducted by the Federal Reserve, we can gain important insights into how assets and liabilities of middle-income households affect their economic security.
The reliance on credit to meet unexpected expenses is pronounced among those already carrying a balance on their credit cards.
Nearly 3 in 10 middle-income adults carry a balance on their credit card most or all of the time, and the same households are five times as likely to borrow if faced with a $400 expense as those who never carry a balance.
In 2018, one-fourth of middle-income adults said they skipped some kind of medical care because of its cost, suggesting insufficient savings can have implications for physical health as well as financial health.
These future payments are a sizable asset for households, currently estimated at about $15 trillion, or about 70 percent of total pension assets.11
Pension assets are now the largest asset held by middle-income households, representing 40 percent of their wealth, substantially exceeding the 22 percent share of home equity in their wealth.
In part, the growth in pension balances reflects the sustained decrease in long-term interest rates over this period, which has boosted the value of the future fixed payments associated with defined benefit pensions.
How do we square the growth in pension assets with survey evidence indicating that many households in the middle of the income distribution are concerned that they will not have enough to live on in retirement? Only 35 percent of middle-income adults, who are not retired, say that their retirement saving is on track, and 16 percent of middle-income adults do not have any money saved for retirement.12 In part, this may reflect the long-term shift by employers to defined contribution plans and away from defined benefit plans, especially in the private sector.
The gap between the relative growth of liabilities and assets peaked during the financial crisis and has narrowed somewhat for middle-income households more recently.
While mortgages rose and fell sharply around the Great Recession, the rise in consumer debt, such as credit cards, auto loans, and student loans, has been relatively steady.
The rapid growth in liabilities reflects both short-term cash flow management and longer-term investments.
Taking on debt is an important way for middle-income families to help buffer unexpected expenses or a temporary loss of income, as indicated by the 8 in 10 middle-income adults who are at least somewhat confident that they could obtain an additional credit card if they applied for it.15 Debt is also a critical mechanism for making key middle-class investments, which I turn to next.
Many households find it challenging to make key middle-class investments because incomes at the middle are not keeping up with the rising costs of education and homeownership, and it is difficult to save enough.
Often, making these investments requires having some savings in the first place—for instance, to make a down payment on a home, forgo income for a few years while paying tuition, or secure credit for a small business.
This matters not least because disparities in wealth often are inherited.18 The prospects that a young person will reach the middle class often depend on attributes he or she inherits—such as the income, wealth, education, age, race, and ethnicity of his or her parents.19 Beyond financial wealth, children inherit intangible assets that affect their ability to access information and social networks that help in obtaining jobs and taking advantage of educational and other wealth-building opportunities.
The accumulation of equity in a home is the primary form of wealth building and economic security for many middle-class families.
Middle-income households saw such steep declines in their average home equity during the Great Recession because they had taken on a high level of mortgage debt relative to their house values.21 This high leverage amplified the effect of the fall in house prices on their wealth.
By 2017, the median sales price for a single-family home was about four times median household income, up from three times median income in 1988.23 The homeownership rate for middle-income families was 68 percent in 2016, down from its peak in 2004 of 74 percent.24 For black households, the declines during and after the recession erased a decade of increases in homeownership—the homeownership rate for black households across the income spectrum was 42 percent in 2018, the same as the rate in the mid-1990s.25 The homeownership rate of Hispanics also declined with the recession but has recovered somewhat, reaching 47 percent in 2018.
Manufacturing and the skilled trades have provided an important pathway to the middle class for many workers, enabling them to own their homes, educate their children, and retire securely.
Increasingly, the onus is on individuals to ensure that their skills are marketable and up-to-date in a highly competitive global marketplace with growing automation.
Juan Salgado, the chancellor of the City Colleges of Chicago and our closing keynote speaker, has emphasized the role of community colleges in offering affordable, quality education and training.29 Students can begin with a certificate program in advanced manufacturing and continue either to a bachelor's degree in engineering at a nearby public university or to the workplace, acquiring marketable skills likely at lower cost than if they had started at a four-year college.
For others, college is seen as an important pathway to middle-class economic security.
Graduates with a bachelor's degree have median weekly earnings that are about 65 percent higher than high school graduates and unemployment rates that are 2 percentage points lower, and they are often better positioned to adapt to changes in the labor market.30
Between 2008 and 2018, tuition and fees at four-year public colleges rose more than six times faster than real median incomes.31 Moreover, as Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago President Evans discussed, while there are benefits associated with attending college, there are also some financial risks, and the returns to education vary widely.
Among middle-income adults with education debt, 30 percent who attended for-profit institutions were behind on student loan payments, compared with 17 percent of those who attended public institutions and 12 percent who attended not-for-profit private institutions.
For example, higher tuition costs—reflected in increasing student loan debt—together with the rising costs of homeownership, have left many middle-income households in a poor position to save for a down payment or handle a mortgage.
This has been particularly true for members of some groups that historically have faced challenges in the labor market, particularly minorities and first-generation Americans.37
One study found that individuals with student loan debt are less likely to start a business, and those who do are more likely to fall behind on their loan payments.38 Another study found that growth in student loan debt resulted in a 14 percent reduction in small business formation in counties over a 10-year period.39
The personal assets of small business owners have been an important source of capital for entrepreneurs as they seek to start and sustain a small business.
As wealth for middle-income households has stagnated, reliance on this source of capital has declined in recent years.40 Very small firms depend heavily on personal debt for start-up and working capital.
Owners of smaller firms often struggle to qualify for bank credit, and among those that apply and are denied, low credit scores and insufficient credit history are the most frequently cited reasons.
Stock market participation fell for middle-income families after the Great Recession, so they have not benefited as much from the subsequent rise in stock prices.41 By 2018, the 30 percent of households in the middle of the income distribution held only 6 percent of aggregate business assets, while the top 10 percent of households held over three‑fourths.
So the robustness of labor income over time is central to the ability of middle-income families to achieve and maintain middle-class financial security.
While the strengthening of the labor market over the course of this extended recovery has benefited middle-income families, the long-term decline in the share of national income going to wage earners is concerning.
The Congress put maximum employment right at the heart of the Federal Reserve's mandate, alongside price stability.
In fact, we are one of only a handful of central banks that have the explicit responsibility to promote maximum employment.
Given that households at the middle of the income distribution rely primarily on wage income, our full employment mandate has served the country well during this extended recovery.
The gains to workers, including those in the middle class, from the strong labor market are clear.
Unemployment is now at 3.6 percent—its lowest level in 50 years.
Employment rates of adults in their prime working years (ages 25 to 54) have been rising steadily during the expansion and recently reached their pre-recession peak of 80 percent.42 Importantly, wage growth has begun to pick up after years of slow gains.
It is notable that the near recovery in middle-class wealth from the Great Recession did not take hold until the labor market began to strengthen.
While higher-income households saw their wealth begin to recover as soon as financial markets stabilized in early 2009, middle-income households did not see their wealth begin to recover until 2010, when the unemployment rate began to decline (figure 13).
Labor market disparities by race have been an enduring feature of the labor market for decades.
The unemployment rate of blacks, while near its historical low, remains at about 7 percent, twice the unemployment rate of whites.
Recent research suggests that the strong labor market may be helping to narrow some of the long-standing disparities for some racial minorities and women, although the results are tentative and very modest.43
The share going to workers—which economists call the labor share—translates into how much of our economic output shows up in people's paychecks.
The decline in the labor share goes to the heart of the rising inequality of wealth and the unequal sharing of prosperity.
Several explanations have been put forward for the decline in the labor share.
The increasing concentration of industries into the hands of a few firms has likely reduced the bargaining power of workers.44 Increasing automation in the workplace is also a factor, along with the ongoing effects of globalization and offshoring.
Earnings have declined as the job market has shifted away from important middle-income occupations.
Manufacturing, for example, employs vastly fewer people now than it has historically.45 It is important to understand the relative importance of these different drivers, as they have different implications for the overall health of the economy and for policies to support middle-income families.
Monetary policy aims to influence employment and inflation over the business cycle, as opposed to addressing these longer-run structural changes.
But the distribution of income and wealth may have important implications for macroeconomic developments, such as the evolution of consumption, which is the single biggest engine of growth in our economy.
That is why the Federal Reserve has a significant interest in understanding distributional developments and their implications.
Recent research finds that households with lower levels of wealth spend a larger fraction of any income gains than households with higher levels of wealth.46 Consequently, an economy that delivers an increasing share of income gains to high-wealth households could result in less growth in consumer demand than one in which the gains are distributed more equally.
The discrepancy between slow growth in income and wealth, on the one hand, and rising costs of housing, health care, and education, on the other, may be making it more difficult for middle-income families to achieve middle-class financial security.
These are important questions, and I am pleased that this conference is bringing to light interesting research to shed light on them.
I am grateful to Claudia Sahm of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing this text, along with Barbara Lipman, Kevin Moore, Karen Pence, Paul Smith, and Mike Zabek.
The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Take, for example, this statement attributed to Aristotle: "The best political community is formed by citizens of the middle class, and that those states are likely to be well-administered in which the middle class is large, and stronger if possible than both the other classes." See Constitutional Rights Foundation (2010), "Plato and Aristotle on Tyranny and the Rule of Law," Bill of Rights in Action, vol.
For more details on the construction of the DFAs, see Michael Batty, Jesse Bricker, Joseph Briggs, Elizabeth Holmquist, Susan McIntosh, Kevin Moore, Eric Nielsen, Sarah Reber, Molly Shatto, Kamila Sommer, Tom Sweeney, and Alice Henriques Volz (2019), "Introducing the Distributional Financial Accounts of the United States (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-017 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March).
Wealth and all of its subcomponents are reported here in 2018 dollars using the personal consumption expenditures price index from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (see table 1.1.4, which is available at https://www.bea.gov).
See Neil Bhutta and Lisa Dettling (2018), "Money in the Bank? Assessing Families' Liquid Savings using the Survey of Consumer Finances," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 19).
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statistical Release Z.1, "Financial Accounts of the United States," table L.117.
For more information, see John Sabelhaus and Alice Henriques Volz (2019), "Are Disappearing Employer Pensions Contributing to Rising Wealth Inequality?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 1).
Thompson (2017), "Recent Trends in Wealth-Holding by Race and Ethnicity: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 27).
See also, using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics, William Darity, Jr., Darrick Hamilton, Mark Paul, Alan Aja, Anne Price, Antonio Moore, and Caterina Chiopris (2018), What We Get Wrong about Closing the Racial Wealth Gap (PDF) (Durham, N.C.: Samuel DuBois Cook Center on Social Equity and Insight Center for Community Economic Development, Duke University, April).
See Laura Feiveson and John Sabelhaus (2018), "How Does Intergenerational Wealth Transmission Affect Wealth Concentration?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 1).
Porter (2018), "The Opportunity Atlas: Mapping the Childhood Roots of Social Mobility," NBER Working Paper Series 25147 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, October).
See Lisa Dettling, Joanne Hsu, and Elizabeth Llanes (2018), "A Wealthless Recovery? Asset Ownership and the Uneven Recovery from the Great Recession," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 13).
See Dettling, Hsu, and Llanes, "A Wealthless Recovery?" in note 23; and Jeff Larrimore and Jenny Schuetz (2017), "Assessing the Severity of Rent Burden on Low-Income Families," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 22).
See Edward Glaeser and Joseph Gyourko (2018), "The Economic Implications of Housing Supply," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
See Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (2019), "An Interview with Juan Salgado, Chancellor of the City Colleges of Chicago: Charting Pathways to the Middle Class," CDPS Blog, April 5.
See Elka Torpey (2018), "Measuring the Value of Education," Bureau of Labor Statistics, Career Outlook (blog), April.
Net tuition and fees at four-year public colleges increased 44 percent between 2008 and 2009 and between 2018 and 2019 (according to data from the College Board, which are available on its website at https://trends.collegeboard.org/college-pricing/figures-tables/tuition-fees-room-and-board-over-time), while income increased about 7 percent in the same period (as indicated by U.S.
Census Bureau data, which can be found on the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
The data are from Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Statistical Release G.19, "Consumer Credit." For a comparison of various estimates of student loan debt, see Jesse Bricker, Meta Brown, Simona Hannon, and Karen Pence (2015), "How Much Student Debt Is Out There?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August 7).
See Alvaro Mezza, Daniel Ringo, and Kamila Sommer (2019), "Can Student Loan Debt Explain Low Homeownership Rates for Young Adults?" Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumer & Community Context, vol.
Kerr (2016), "Immigrant Entrepreneurship," NBER Working Paper Series 22385 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July).
See also the minority-owned businesses special report of the Federal Reserve Banks' Small Business Credit Survey, which is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website at https://www.newyorkfed.org/smallbusiness/small-business-credit-survey-employer-firms-2016.
Ambrose, Larry Cordell, and Shuwei Ma (2015), "The Impact of Student Loan Debt on Small Business Formation (PDF)," Working Paper Series 15-26 (Philadelphia: Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, July), Return to text
Kwast, and Jonathan Pogach (2017), "Small Businesses and Small Business Finance during the Financial Crisis and the Great Recession: New Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances," in John Haltiwanger, Erik Hurst, Javier Miranda, and Antoinette Schoar, eds., Measuring Entrepreneurial Businesses: Current Knowledge and Challenges, National Bureau of Economic Research, Studies in Income and Wealth (Chicago: University of Chicago Press), pp.
Stafford (2016), "Stock Market Participation: Family Responses to Housing Consumption Commitments," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
Wilcox (2019), "Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF)" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7–8.
Steinbaum (2017), "Labor Market Concentration," NBER Working Paper Series 24147 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, December; revised February 2019); Evan Starr, J.J.
Labor Force," University of Michigan Law and Economics Research Paper Series 18-013 (Ann Arbor, Mich.: University of Michigan Law School, April); Sandeep Vaheesan (forthcoming), "Accommodating Capital and Policing Labor: Antitrust in the Two Gilded Ages," Maryland Law Review; and David Autor, David Dorn, Lawrence F.
Katz, Christina Patterson, and John Van Reenen (2017), "The Fall of the Labor Share and the Rise of Superstar Firms," NBER Working Paper Series 23396 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May).
See David Autor and Anna Salomons (2018), "Is Automation Labor-Displacing? Productivity Growth, Employment, and the Labor Share (PDF)," paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 8–9; David H.
Autor and David Dorn (2013), "The Growth of Low-Skill Service Jobs and the Polarization of the U.S.
See Jonathan Fisher, David Johnson, Timothy Smeeding, and Jeffrey Thompson (2019), "Estimating the Marginal Propensity to Consume Using the Distributions of Income, Consumption and Wealth (PDF)," Working Paper Series 19-4 (Boston: Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, February).
See Aditya Aladangady and Laura Feiveson (2018), "A Not-So-Great Recovery in Consumption: What Is Holding Back Household Spending?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 8).


At the 2019 Federal Reserve System Community Development Research Conference: "Renewing the Promise of the Middle Class," Washington, D.C.
It is my pleasure to welcome all of you to the Federal Reserve System's 11th Community Development Research Conference, cosponsored by the community development offices of all 12 Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors.
These biennial conferences are one manifestation of the Federal Reserve's deep commitment to supporting research that helps policymakers, community development practitioners, and researchers improve the economic well-being of families and communities.
These gatherings also inform the Federal Reserve System's work in promoting consumer protection and community development, and I would like to thank all of you for your contributions to this conference.
While there are many definitions of "middle class," I think we can agree that achieving a basic level of economic security is fundamental.
Surveys suggest that many Americans believe being middle class means having a secure job and the ability to save.1 In recent decades, income growth for middle-income households has lagged behind that for high‑income households.2 In addition, economic resources differ markedly by race, education, occupation, geography, and other factors.
Those circumstances underscore a two-fold challenge for our country: fostering the conditions that will help lower-income families reach the middle class, while ensuring that middle-class status still provides the basic economic security that it has traditionally offered.
The first observation is to note the long-term decline in relative income growth and upward economic mobility for those in the middle.
This conference will touch on other possible reasons for this decline in upward mobility and relative income, such as changes in the prospects for career advancement that vary by occupation and location.
The second observation is the widening gap in economic status and prospects between those with a college degree and those without one.
In the 1960s, well over 90 percent of working-age men held a job, and there was very little difference in employment between those with or without a college degree.
Research presented this morning will discuss some possible explanations for the divergence in employment, income, and other economic prospects between college grads and others.
The third observation is that the prospect of moving up the economic ladder depends on factors beyond effort and talent, including your family, the neighborhood you grow up in, and the quality of the primary and secondary schools you attend.
Some research indicates that economic prospects are better for those who grow up in neighborhoods with less income inequality, less concentrated poverty, and better performing schools.
Finally, across so many dimensions, we continue to see disparities in economic outcomes by race and ethnicity.

"Fed Listens" in Richmond: How Does Monetary Policy Affect Your Community?
At the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Richmond Community Listening Session, Richmond, Virginia
It is good to be here in Richmond today.1 I appreciate my colleague, Tom Barkin, leading this event, and it is a pleasure to also be with Sherrie Brach Armstrong, CEO of the Community Foundation for a greater Richmond; Tim Davey, Timmons Group economic development manager; Shawn Smith, director of workforce development at Goodwill of Central and Coastal Virginia; and Robert Ukrop, chairman and CEO of Ukrop's Homestyle Foods.
Today's community listening session is part of a series called "Fed Listens." The Federal Reserve is undertaking a review to make sure we are carrying out the monetary policy goals assigned to us by the Congress in the most effective way we can.2 In conducting this review, we are reaching out to communities around the country in sessions like this to understand how you are experiencing the economy day to day.
So what are the monetary policy goals the Congress assigned us? Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve to use monetary policy to achieve maximum employment and price stability.
Specifically, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC)—the group at the Fed responsible for determining monetary policy—has announced that our goal is to keep inflation around 2 percent over time.
The maximum employment part of our dual mandate is straightforward: The Congress has directed us to achieve the highest level of employment—and thus the lowest level of unemployment—that is consistent with price stability.
While the Congress has specified the goals for monetary policy and a set of tools or authorities to pursue them, it has allowed the FOMC to determine how to best go about achieving those goals.
Last year, core inflation was very close to our goal.
We also want to make sure that the way we are setting monetary policy is keeping up with the way the economy is changing, which I have been referring to as the "new normal."3 There are a few key features of that new normal.
For example, interest rates have stayed very low in recent years not only in the United States, but also in many other advanced economies.
For a variety of reasons, it seems likely that equilibrium interest rates will remain low in the future.
Low interest rates present a challenge for the traditional ways of conducting monetary policy.
That is especially true in recessions when, in the past, the Federal Reserve has typically cut interest rates by 4 to 5 percentage points in order to support household spending and business investment.
But when equilibrium interest rates are low, we have less room to cut interest rates and thus less room to buffer the economy using our conventional tool.
For example, following the most recent recession in 2008 and 2009, we kept interest rates as low as the Committee thought they could go, which was close to zero, for many years.
Another big change in the economy is that inflation doesn't move as much with economic activity and employment as it has in the past.
In many ways, the flatter Phillips curve has advantages: It means that the labor market can strengthen a lot and pull many workers that may have been sidelined back into productive employment without an acceleration in inflation, unlike what we saw in the 1960s and 1970s.
But there is an important risk with today's low sensitivity of inflation to slack: It makes it more difficult to boost inflation to our objective of 2 percent on a sustainable basis.
And, as we know from other countries, if inflation consistently falls short of the central bank's objective, lower inflation tends to get embedded in people's expectations.
Expectations that inflation will remain low in turn can create a self-fulfilling dynamic with actual inflation, making it even more difficult for the central bank to boost inflation.
And because inflation is reflected in nominal interest rates, that, in turn, can also reduce the amount of policy space the central bank has available to prevent the economy from slipping into recession.
In fact, in recent years, central banks around the world have had to use a larger variety of policy tools than they traditionally used to respond to the financial crisis and support economic expansion.
Given the new normal of low equilibrium interest rates and low sensitivity of inflation to slack, it is prudent to assess how well various approaches worked both here and around the world, with a view to identifying the best ways to promote the goals the Congress assigned to us.
One of those is the idea that the Federal Reserve should explicitly promise to "make up" for the fact that interest rates can't be cut as much as during past recessions.
The Federal Reserve could hold interest rates lower after a recession is over, perhaps by promising not to raise interest rates until inflation or the unemployment rate have reached a particular level.
A related idea is average inflation targeting, meaning the Fed would aim to achieve its inflation objective on average over a longer period of time—perhaps over the business cycle.
So if inflation fell short during a recession, the Federal Reserve would aim at inflation above target during the recovery and expansion.
This approach would also have aspects of a make-up policy, as policy would likely be kept easier—that is, more accommodative—than otherwise during the period where inflation is above target.
There is some skepticism that a central bank would in fact prove able to support above-target inflation over a sustained period without becoming concerned that inflation might accelerate and inflation expectations might rise too high.
Another idea I would like to hear more about involves targeting the yield on specific securities so that once the short-term interest rates we traditionally target have hit zero, we might turn to targeting slightly longer-term interest rates—initially one-year interest rates, for example, and if more stimulus is needed, perhaps moving out the curve to two-year rates.
Under this policy, the Federal Reserve would stand ready to use its balance sheet to hit the targeted interest rate, but unlike the asset purchases that were undertaken in the recent recession, there would be no specific commitments with regard to purchases of Treasury securities.
Similar to make-up policies, such an approach could help communicate publicly how long the Federal Reserve is planning to keep rates low.
Of course, we may find that the preferred approach is modest enhancements to the tools that proved their worth during the crisis.
Now, how does today's event fit into all of this? Just as the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond is sponsoring today's event with representatives of its local community, so too are other Reserve Banks sponsoring similar events.
And, in addition to presentations from prominent outside experts, we made sure to add panels to hear from community organizations, training institutions, and other groups that can give us insights on how monetary policy is affecting Main Street.
In fact, my first such visit was in this District with community development staff from the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.
Due to the wisdom of the Fed's original architects, the Federal Reserve System derives tremendous value from interacting with communities from all around the country.
In 2015, we created a Community Advisory Council at the Federal Reserve Board, where we hear from a broad variety of community groups and others.
And many of the regional Federal Reserve Banks have similar councils, including the Richmond Fed's Community Investment Council.
In our review this year, we are listening broadly and are seeking perspectives at the community level.
How is your community experiencing today's economy? Is everyone who wants a job able to get one? Can they get the necessary training? Are businesses finding it relatively easy to hire the workers they need? What about inflation and pricing power? And what about the availability and cost of credit—whether it be to start or expand a small business, buy a car to get to work, or invest in owning a home or getting a degree? I look forward to hearing your views on these and other questions.
I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Yellen, "Revolution and Evolution in Central Bank Communications," remarks at the Haas School of Business, University of California, Berkeley, Berkeley, California, November 13, 2012.
Clarida, "The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices," remarks at the 2019 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York, February 22, 2019.
Powell, "Monetary Policy: Normalization and the Road Ahead," remarks at the 2019 SIEPR Economic Summit, Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California, March 8, 2019.
Lael Brainard, "The "New Normal" and What It Means for Monetary Policy," remarks at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, Illinois, September 12, 2016.

At the Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference "Strategies for Monetary Policy," Stanford University, Stanford, California
It is an honor and a privilege to participate once again in this annual Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference.
The topic of this year's conference, "Strategies for Monetary Policy," is especially timely.
As you know, the Federal Reserve System is conducting a review of the strategy, tools, and communication practices we deploy to pursue our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability.
In this review, we expect to benefit from the insights and perspectives that are presented today, as well as those offered at other conferences devoted to this topic, as we assess possible practical ways in which we might refine our existing monetary policy framework to better achieve our dual-mandate goals on a sustained basis.
My talk today will not, however, be devoted to a broad review of the Fed's monetary policy framework—that process is ongoing, and I would not want to prejudge the outcome—but it will instead focus on some of the important ways in which economic models and financial market signals help me think about conducting monetary policy in practice after a career of thinking about it in theory.1
Let me set the scene with a very brief—and certainly selective—review of the evolution over the past several decades of professional thinking about monetary policy.
I will begin with Milton Friedman's landmark 1967 American Economic Association presidential address, "The Role of Monetary Policy."2 This article is, of course, most famous for its message that there is no long-run, exploitable tradeoff between inflation and unemployment.
And in this paper, Friedman introduced the concept of the "natural rate of unemployment," which today we call u*.3 What is less widely appreciated is that Friedman's article also contains a concise but insightful discussion of Wicksell's "natural rate of interest"—r* in today's terminology—the real interest rate consistent with price stability.
But while u* and r* provide key reference points in Friedman's framework for assessing how far an economy may be from its long-run equilibrium in labor and financial markets, they play absolutely no role in the monetary policy rule he advocates: his well-known k-percent rule that central banks should aim for and deliver a constant rate of growth of a monetary aggregate.
This simple rule, he believed, could deliver long-run price stability without requiring the central bank to take a stand on, model, or estimate either r* or u*.
Although he acknowledged that shocks would push u away from u* (and, implicitly, r away from r*), Friedman felt the role of monetary policy was to operate with a simple quantity rule that did not itself introduce potential instability into the process by which an economy on its own would converge to u* and r*.4 In Friedman's policy framework, u* and r* are economic destinations, not policy rule inputs.
Of course, I do not need to elaborate for this audience that the history of k-percent rules is that they were rarely tried, and when they were tried in the 1970s and the 1980s, they were found to work much better in theory than in practice.5 Velocity relationships proved to be empirically unstable, and there was often only a very loose connection between the growth rate of the monetary base—which the central bank could control—and the growth rate of the broader monetary aggregates, which are more tightly linked to economic activity.
Moreover, the macroeconomic priority in the 1980s in the United States, the United Kingdom, and other major countries was to do "whatever it takes" to break the back of inflation and to restore the credibility squandered by central banks that had been unable or unwilling to provide a nominal anchor after the collapse of the Bretton Woods system.
By the early 1990s, the back of inflation had been broken (thank you, Paul Volcker), conditions for price stability had been achieved (thank you, Alan Greenspan), and the time was right for something to fill the vacuum in central bank practice left by the realization that monetary aggregate targeting was not, in practice, a workable monetary policy framework.
Although it was mostly unspoken, there was a growing sense at the time that a simple, systematic framework for central bank practice was needed to ensure that the hard-won gains from breaking the back of inflation were not given away by short-sighted, discretionary monetary experiments that were poorly executed, such as had been the case in the 1970s.
Policy Rules in Practice." Again, for this audience, I will not need to remind you of the enormous impact this single paper had not only on the field of monetary economics, but also—and more importantly—on the practice of monetary policy.
For our purposes today, I will note that the crucial insight of John's paper was that, whereas a central bank could pick the "k" in a "k-percent" rule on its own, without any reference to the underlying parameters of the economy (including r* and u*), a well-designed rule for setting a short-term interest rate as a policy instrument should, John argued, respect several requirements.6 First, the rule should anchor the nominal policy rate at a level equal to the sum of its estimate of the neutral real interest rate (r*) and the inflation target.
Second, to achieve this nominal anchor, the central bank should be prepared to raise the nominal policy rate by more than one-for-one when inflation exceeds target (the Taylor principle).
And, third, the central bank should lean against the wind when output—or, via an Okun's law relationship, the unemployment rate—deviates from its estimate of potential (u*).
In other words, whereas in Friedman's k-percent policy rule u* and r* are destinations irrelevant to the choice of k, in the Taylor rule—and most subsequent Taylor-type rules—u* and r* are necessary inputs.
The third requirement—that monetary policy lean against the wind in response to an output or unemployment gap—not only contributes to the objective of price stability, but is also obviously desirable from the perspective of a central bank like the Fed that has a dual mandate.
The Taylor approach to instrument-rule specification has been found to produce good macroeconomic outcomes across a wide range of macroeconomic models.
Moreover, in a broad class of both closed and open economy dynamic stochastic general equilibrium, or DSGE, models, Taylor-type rules can be shown to be optimal given the underlying micro foundations of these models.
In original formulations of Taylor-type rules, r* was treated as constant and set equal to 2 percent, and potential output was set equal to the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) estimates of potential output, or, in specifications using the unemployment rate as the activity variable, u* was set equal to the CBO's estimate of the natural unemployment rate.
These assumptions were reasonable at the time, and I myself wrote a number of papers with coauthors in the years before the Global Financial Crisis that incorporated them.7
At each Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, my colleagues and I consult potential policy rate paths implied by a number of policy rules, as we assess what adjustments, if any, may be required for the stance of monetary policy to achieve and maintain our dual-mandate objectives.8 A presentation and discussion of several of these rules has been included in the semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress since July 2017.9 One thing I have come to appreciate is that, as I assess the benefits and costs of alternative policy scenarios based on a set of policy rules and economic projections, it is important to recognize up front that key inputs to this assessment, including u* and r*, are unobservable and must be inferred from data via models.10 I would now like to discuss how I incorporate such considerations into thinking about how to choose among monetary policy alternatives.
A monetary policy strategy must find a way to combine incoming data and a model of the economy with a healthy dose of judgment—and humility!—to formulate, and then communicate, a path for the policy rate most consistent with the central bank's objectives.
There are two distinct ways in which I think that the path for the federal funds rate should be data dependent.11 Monetary policy should be data dependent in the sense that incoming data reveal at any point in time where the economy is relative to the ultimate objectives of price stability and maximum employment.
This information on where the economy is relative to the goals of monetary policy is an important input into interest rate feedback rules—after all, they have to feed back on something.
Data dependence in this sense is well understood, as it is of the type implied by a large family of policy rules, including Taylor-type rules discussed earlier, in which the parameters of the economy needed to formulate such rules are taken as known.
As a result, in the real world, monetary policy should be—and in the United States, I believe, is—data dependent in a second sense: Policymakers should and do study incoming data and use models to extract signals that enable them to update and improve estimates of r* and u*.
As indicated in the Summary of Economic Projections, FOMC participants have, over the past seven years, repeatedly revised down their estimates of both u* and r* as unemployment fell and real interest rates remained well below prior estimates of neutral without the rise in inflation those earlier estimates would have predicted (figures 1 and 2).
And these revisions to u* and r* appeared to have had an important influence on the path for the policy rate actually implemented in recent years.
One could interpret any changes in the conduct of policy as a shift in the central bank's reaction function.
But in my view, when such changes result from revised estimates of u* or r*, they merely reflect an updating of an existing reaction function.
In addition to u* and r*, another important input into any monetary policy assessment is the state of inflation expectations.
Since the late 1990s, inflation expectations appear to have been stable and are often said to be "well anchored." However, inflation expectations are not directly observable; they must be inferred from models, other macroeconomic information, market prices, and surveys.
Longer-term inflation expectations that are anchored materially above or below the 2 percent inflation objective present a risk to price stability.
In many theoretical rational expectations models, expected inflation is anchored at the target level by assumption.
Because the true model of the economy is unknown, either because the structure is unknown or because the parameters of a known structure are evolving, I believe policymakers should consult a number and variety of sources of information about neutral real interest rates and expected inflation, to name just two key macroeconomic variables.
Because macroeconomic models of r* and long-term inflation expectations are potentially misspecified, seeking out other sources of information that are not derived from the same models can be especially useful.
To be sure, financial market signals are inevitably noisy, and day-to-day movements in asset prices are unlikely to tell us much about the cyclical or structural position of the economy.12 However, persistent shifts in financial market conditions can be informative, and signals derived from financial market data—along with surveys of households, firms, and market participants, data, as well as outside forecasts—can be an important complement to estimates obtained from historically estimated and calibrated macroeconomic models.13
Interest rate futures and interest rate swaps markets provide one source of high-frequency information about the path and destination for the federal funds rate expected by market participants (figure 3).
Interest rate option markets, under certain assumptions, can offer insights about the entire ex ante probability distribution of policy rate outcomes for calendar dates near or far into the future (figure 4).
And, indeed, when one reads that a future policy decision by the Fed or any central bank is "fully priced in," this is usually based on a "straight read" of futures and options prices.
But these signals from interest rate derivatives markets are only a pure measure of the expected policy rate path under the assumption of a zero risk premium.
For this reason, it is useful to compare policy rate paths derived from market prices with the path obtained from surveys of market participants, which, while subject to measurement error, should not be contaminated with a term premium.
Market- and survey-based estimates of the policy rate path are often highly correlated.
But when there is a divergence between the path or destination for the policy rate implied by the surveys and a straight read of interest rate derivatives prices, I place at least as much weight on the survey evidence (for example, derived from the surveys of primary dealers and market participants conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York) as I do on the estimates obtained from market prices (figure 3).
The Treasury yield curve can provide another source of information about the expected path and ultimate longer-run destination of the policy rate.
But, again, the yield curve, like the interest rate futures strip, reflects not only expectations of the path of short-term interest rates, but also liquidity and term premium factors Thus, to extract signal about policy from noise in the yield curve, a term structure model is required.
But different term structure models can and do produce different estimates of the expected path for policy and thus the term premium.
Treasury yields are driven in part by a significant "global" factor, which complicates efforts to treat the slope of the yield curve as a sufficient statistic for the expected path of U.S.
Again, here, surveys of market participants can provide useful information—for example, about "the expected average federal funds rate over the next 10 years," which provides an alternative way to identify the term premium component in the U.S.
Quotes from the Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) market can provide valuable information about two key inputs to monetary policy analysis: long-run r* and expected inflation.14 Direct reads of TIPS spot rates and forward rates are signals of the levels of real interest rates that investors expect at various horizons, and they can be used to complement model-based estimates of r*.
In addition, TIPS market data, together with nominal Treasury yields, can be used to construct measures of "breakeven inflation" or inflation compensation that provide a noisy signal of market expectations of future inflation.
But, again, a straight read of breakeven inflation needs to be augmented with a model to filter out the liquidity and risk premium components that place a wedge between inflation compensation and expected inflation.
As is the case with the yield curve and interest rate futures, it is useful to compare estimates of expected inflation derived from breakeven inflation data with estimates of expected inflation obtained from surveys—for example, the expected inflation over the next 5 to 10 years from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers (figure 5).
Market- and survey-based estimates of expected inflation are correlated, but, again, when there is a divergence between the two, I place at least as much weight on the survey evidence as on the market-derived estimates.
The examples I have mentioned illustrate the important point that, in practice, there is not typically a clean distinction between "model-based" and "market-based" inference of key economic variables such as r* and expected inflation.
The reason is that market prices reflect not only market expectations, but also risk and liquidity premiums that need to be filtered out to recover the object of interest—for example, expected inflation or long-run r*.
This filtering almost always requires a model of some sort, so even market-based estimates of key inputs to monetary policy are, to some extent, model dependent.
Let me now draw together some implications of the approach to models, markets, and monetary policy I have laid out in these remarks.
Macroeconomic models are, of course, an essential tool for monetary policy analysis, but the structure of the economy evolves, and the policy framework must be—and I believe, at the Federal Reserve, is—nimble enough to respect this evolution.
While financial market signals can and sometimes do provide a reality check on the predictions of "a model gone astray," market prices are, at best, noisy signals of the macroeconomic variables of interest, and the process of filtering out the noise itself requires a model—and good judgment.
Survey estimates of the long-run destination for key monetary policy inputs can—and, at the Fed, do—complement the predictions from macro models and market prices (figure 6).15 Yes, the Fed's job would be (much) easier if the real world of 2019 satisfied the requirements to run Friedman's k-percent policy rule, but it does not and has not for at least 50 years, and our policy framework must and does reflect this reality.
The unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, real wages are rising in line with productivity, inflationary pressures are muted, and expected inflation is stable.
Moreover, the federal funds rate is now in the range of estimates of its longer-run neutral level, and the unemployment rate is not far below many estimates of u*.
Plugging these estimates into a 1993 Taylor rule produces a federal funds rate very close to our current target range for the policy rate.16 So with the economy operating at or very close to the Fed's dual-mandate objectives and with the policy rate in the range of FOMC participants' estimates of neutral, we can, I believe, afford to be data dependent—in both senses of the term as I have discussed—as we assess what, if any, further adjustments in our policy stance might be required to maintain our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, December (revised January 2019).
"The Dollar and Real Interest Rates," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.
Taylor (1999), "A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules (PDF)," chapter 7 in John B.
Economy and Monetary Policy," speech given at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 25.
Monetary Policy," speech at the Clearing House and the Bank Policy Institute Annual Conference, New York, November 27.
"The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective," Journal of Economic Literature, vol.
"Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
"Safety, Liquidity, and the Natural Rate of Interest (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"Monetary Policy and Shifts in Long-Run Productivity Growth," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of Federal Reserve System, Division of Monetary Affairs, May.
"Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"The Science of Monetary Policy: An Imperfect Knowledge Perspective," Journal of Economic Literature, vol.
"Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF)" (adopted effective January 24, 2012; amended as effective January 29, 2019).
"A Monetary and Fiscal Framework for Economic Stability," American Economic Review, vol.
"Short-Run and Long-Run Effects of Milton Friedman's Presidential Address," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
"A Comparison of Some Basic Monetary Policy Regimes for Open Economies: Implications of Different Degrees of Instrument Adjustment and Wage Persistence," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," Journal of International Economics, vol.
"A Time Series Model of Interest Rates with the Effective Lower Bound (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-033.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April.
"What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: Alternative Specifications (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-059.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February (revised May 2017).
"Time-Varying Parameter Vector Autoregressions: Specification, Estimation, and an Application," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Quarterly, vol.
"Friedman's Presidential Address in the Evolution of Macroeconomic Thought," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
"Seven Fallacies concerning Milton Friedman's 'The Role of Monetary Policy,' (PDF) " Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-013.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February.
"Phillips Curves, Expectations of Inflation and Optimal Unemployment over Time," Economica, vol.
"Optimal Choice of Monetary Policy in a Simple Stochastic Macro Model," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
"A Shadow Rate Model of Intermediate-Term Policy Rate Expectations," FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 4.
"Inflation Forecast Targeting: Implementing and Monitoring Inflation Targets," European Economic Review, vol.
"Inflation Targeting as a Monetary Policy Rule," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.
"Changes in American Economic Policy in the 1980s: Watershed or Pendulum Swing?" Journal of Economic Literature, vol.
"A Historical Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules (PDF)," in John B.
Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants.
Recent retrospectives on Friedman's (1968) American Economic Association address that consider its implications for monetary policy analysis include Hall and Sargent (2018), Laidler (2018), Mankiw and Reis (2018), and Nelson (2018).
At roughly the same time, Phelps (1967) derived similar results using a formal economic model.
Another consideration motivating Friedman's choice of rule was his concern that a more active monetary policy strategy might be difficult to formulate because of the "long and variable lags" in the effect of monetary policy (a term he had coined in Friedman (1948, p.
Monetary targeting was adopted to a limited degree by the Federal Reserve and other central banks in the 1970s and 1980s, but it did not endure.
Even during the period from 1979 to 1982, when the Federal Open Market Committee was most focused on monetary aggregates, policymakers were still concerned with interest rates in the setting of policy, and ultimate objectives for the output gap and inflation figured as criteria for policy decisions.
In addition, Poole (1970) and Woodford (2003) are key references on the theoretical criticisms of monetary targeting.
Another key study of simple interest rate rules was Henderson and McKibbin (1993).
It should be noted that a Taylor type rule is an instrument rule for achieving the inflation objective that enters the rule.
In practice, it is one way to implement a flexible inflation targeting regime.
See Bernanke and others (1999) and Svensson (1997, 1999) for important contributions on the considerations involved in specifying an inflation-targeting monetary policy strategy.
For the FOMC's description of its mandate, see the FOMC's (2019) Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.
The box "Monetary Policy Rules and Systematic Monetary Policy" in the Board's February 2019 Monetary Policy Report (MPR) describes how simple policy rules are used in theory and in practical policymaking.
The box "Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules" in the July 2018 MPR discusses how shifts in r* complicate monetary policy decision making.
As Friedman once put it, "I don't know what the natural rate is, neither do you, and neither does anyone else" (quoted in Bennett (1995)).
Uncertainty regarding r*, u*, and long-term inflation expectations is not the only source of uncertainty that has implications for monetary policy.
Edge, Laubach, and Williams (2005) show how the duration of a productivity shock can affect even the direction of the best monetary policy response.
And Eusepi and Preston (2018) show that replacing model-consistent expectations with forms of adaptive learning means that some, but not all, of the key results regarding best conduct in monetary policy under full information carry through.
Like many others, I believe that monetary policy should respond to financial market fluctuations when they have material implications for our outlook for employment and inflation, but monetary policy should not generally target asset prices themselves.

The Federal Reserve uses survey data and conducts surveys of its own on a range of macroeconomic and financial conditions.
Among the surveys the Fed conducts are the Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices and the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms.
In addition, the staff at the Federal Reserve Board uses disaggregated and high-frequency data to estimate the state of the economy in real time.
Such data include disaggregated labor market data from ADP and data on expenditures from credit card transactions.
Well before the launch of the TIPS market, Friedman (1984) stressed the benefits to monetary policy analysis that would arise from the availability of market-based estimates of longer-term inflation expectations, and he contrasted that situation with the one then prevailing, in which it was difficult to ascertain the real yields implied by the market's longer-term nominal yields.
105) observed—also in the pre-TIPS era—that "it is hard to measure expected long-term inflation rates." Return to text
It is important to note that the range of model estimates that is shown in the shaded portion of figure 6 is not a confidence interval.
Yield curve data can also be used to compute estimates of the neutral rate of interest, as in Bauer and Rudebusch (2019).

At the "Fed Family" Luncheon at the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California
Today I would like to share a few observations on innovation as it relates to the business of community banking.
In particular, I will focus on opportunities for community banks to innovate through collaboration with fintech firms.
I'll also discuss the role our regulatory structure plays in those relationships.1
Community banks, like just about every other industry, are learning to adapt to a new world of rapid innovation and shifting consumer expectations.
TransUnion estimates that, about a decade ago, fintech lenders generated less than 1 percent of personal loans.2 Today, fintech firms originate a larger share of personal loans than banks.3 This is not all bad news for banks, though.
A large share of fintech lending is actually originated by bank partners working with fintech firms.
Similarly, the funds that flow between a fintech lender and borrowers almost always travel across the payment services of a bank.
So, while the changes in the market pose potential competitive threats to banks, the changes also raise potential new opportunities for banks.
This is especially true for community banks, which are frequently the banks working most closely with fintech lenders.
Not too long ago commentators were looking at the impact of fintech on community banking as a zero-sum game.
In fact, many wondered whether fintech firms would put community banks out of business.4 Recent surveys show how much the discussion has evolved.
Rather than fear fintech, more and more community bankers are trying to determine how to adjust their businesses to make the best use of new technologies.
For example, in the 2018 Survey of Community Banks by the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS), small banks almost universally agreed that fintech firms are not currently their primary competitor.5 These findings are consistent with data from the 2018 Small Business Lending Survey by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).6 In contrast, almost half of large banks identified fintech firms as frequent competitors.
The FDIC opined that this was likely because large banks, like fintech firms, rely heavily on data and automated technology when making loans.
A much lower percentage of small banks--only about 10 percent--saw fintech firms as current competitors.
As I'll discuss later, it's likely that the relationship-driven nature of community bank business models helps insulate these banks from fintech competitors.
The most interesting possibilities emerged in survey responses about small banks working together with fintech firms as partners.
The community bank respondents to the CSBS survey included numerous anecdotes and observations about the important opportunities fintech offered community banks to diversify their products, extend their reach, and offer more efficient services for their customers.7
Indeed, fintech firms may complement the activities of community banks well.
For example, while small businesses may value the relationships that local bankers offer, they don't like the lengthy process of filling out loan applications, waiting for credit decisions, and the time it takes small banks to make funds available.8 Those are precisely the types of issues that data-driven, smartphone-based fintech firms are good at addressing.9
At the same time, community banks' particular advantages, mainly their strong relationships with their small business customers, would be difficult for smartphone-based fintech apps to replicate.
Let me give you an example: During last year's community bank research conference held at the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis,10 a community bank based in Santa Barbara described the harrowing months around the end of 2017.
As you know all too well, a massive wildfire, followed by a deadly series of mudslides, caused devastating damage and five emergency evacuations of Montecito, California.11 Within 24 hours of the wildfires and mudslides, the community bank declared an emergency and began executing its disaster response strategy.12 The bank used a wide range of communication channels, from Facebook to text messaging, to keep in touch with its employees and its customers.
The bank offered new lines of credit (including a 24-hour turnaround on small business lines).
It made payment deferrals on already-existing loans and provided free safe deposit boxes.
The bank even delivered more than 15,000 water bottles and offered more than 1,500 respirators for local residents at its branches.
Small businesses value that level of commitment to local customers.
And they recognize the benefits of working with local community banks that understand their regions and businesses.
The relationship-based nature of community bank lending helps small businesses that often lack the detailed balance sheets or detailed income statements required by larger banks.13 Even when small businesses do have the right paperwork, large banks are still less likely to engage in lending at small bank levels.
That's because the transaction costs for underwriting a $100,000 loan are comparable to a $1 million loan.
None of this is lost on small businesses, which, according to the Federal Reserve's Small Business Credit Survey, continue to express greater satisfaction with small banks compared to both big banks and fintech lenders.14
This is not to say that the community banks' advantages cannot be challenged by technology.
Many fintech firms are currently looking to leverage their deep ties with other aspects of small businesses--their payment processing services or accounting software, for instance--to build data-driven lending products that are tied to the day-to-day operations of small businesses.
Fintech lenders can provide easy-to-use online applications, rapid loan decisionmaking, and customer service that helps bring low cost, automated decisionmaking to the small loan segment that was previously left to community banks.
Partnering with a fintech firm can offer a community bank the best of both worlds.
The bank can take advantage of new technology and all the efficiencies that come with it as an extension of the banks' relationship-banking model.
In a sense, fintech is just the latest evolution of a long history of community banks leveraging technology to provide financial services.
I'm thinking here of technologies, such as ATMs, mobile banking, and remote deposit capture.15 For their part, community banks offer potential fintech partners a consumer-first approach to business and a number of advantages: deposit insurance and liquidity; a stable customer base; credibility in a local community; and settlement and compliance services.16 I thought one response to the CSBS survey said it best.
What can the Federal Reserve do to foster prudent community bank innovation?
I believe that if a bank has not started thinking about how innovation may impact its business, it is very late to the game.
This does not mean that every bank has to run out this afternoon and partner with a fintech firm--there may be all kinds of thoughtful reasons not to engage with them.
What matters is that banks, particularly community banks, have gone through the process of thinking about the relevant issues.18
But there are many questions about how community banks are adjusting to the changing environment.
For instance, about 40 percent of community banks say that they do not currently offer online loan applications and have no immediate plans to do so.19 That 40 percent may represent bankers who have not gone through the process of thinking about the way innovation impacts their business.
Most importantly, though, it may indicate that some community banks may feel that they are simply not able to leverage new technology.
Most small banks are dependent on partnerships with third parties to make use of new technologies.20 I am concerned that some banks are not innovating because they feel they lack the ability to navigate the complex regulatory and compliance issues that may arise.
Among other requirements, for instance, before a bank partners with a fintech firm, it first has to consider regulatory and supervisory expectations regarding third-party risk management.
Written guidance may allow for risk-based or more tailored approaches, but a number of factors contribute to what the Treasury Department recently described as, "more stringent de facto regulation." In particular, Treasury raised concerns that banks that are worried about criticism from examiners might, "adopt a more uniformly stringent vendor oversight approach rather than trying to convince their examiners to permit a more tailored approach to vendor oversight."21 And this may ultimately deter banks from trying to explore how they should be adapting their business strategies in light of technological change.
Given these concerns, what is the Federal Reserve Board's role, as a bank supervisor, in helping community banks chart their way through changing times? Let me be clear.
However, I think supervisors need to recognize and be thoughtful about how we might affect the way banks consider innovation.
In particular, I think it's important that we fulfill our responsibilities to ensure safety and soundness of banks and consumer protection, while also creating a regulatory environment that does not hinder the integration of responsible innovation into the strategic direction that a bank opts to pursue.
Here at the Federal Reserve, I think it's vital that we look closely at our work to make sure we are not hindering prudent innovation between community banks and fintech firms.
We need to think about how our guidance sets expectations for the way banks should engage third parties.
To begin with, I recognize the need to ensure that our outsourcing risk management guidance appropriately reflects the present-day business realities of the banks that we supervise.
For instance, regulators' third-party risk management frameworks discuss particular types of contractual terms and, where appropriate, audit rights by a bank over its service providers.
However, when a community bank is in negotiations with large vendors, such as cloud service companies and core service providers, they may not be in a position to make demands.
Concerns about compliance can also make it difficult for a community bank to work with small partners.
A small fintech firm may lack a traditional financial history, raising questions about how a bank can evaluate the fintech firm's status in the industry, corporate history, or financial condition.
It certainly can be difficult for a small bank's staff to evaluate a wide range of potential technology vendors.
I am heartened to hear that small banks are increasingly collaborating to vet third-parties.
Services are also emerging to help deliver due diligence information to banks and monitor their third-party relationships.
Of course, the ultimate responsibility should always lie with bank management, as each relationship involves particular services, for particular needs, for a particular risk profile.
However, it seems sensible that a large amount of the vetting, contracting, and onboarding process could be streamlined for banks by collaboration or specialized third-party services.
We are also looking to engage industry more frequently and openly so that we understand how they are weighing questions relating to innovation and how bank regulators may or may not impact those considerations.
Along those lines, we continue to look for new ways for regulated institutions to interact with the Federal Reserve System outside of the examination process.
In particular, supervised institutions, vendors, or consumer advocates are encouraged to contact their local Reserve Bank; talk with us about the issues they face; and, in some cases, ask clarifying questions about relevant legal frameworks and supervisory expectations.
As regulators and banks adjust to this post-crisis age of innovation, it is important for us to understand the pain points for community banks.
As a regulator, my priority will always be facilitating a banking system that is safe and sound and in which consumers are treated fairly.
But regulators also have to ask: How can our approach to supervision be modernized so that it supports responsible innovation by our supervised institutions?
I am looking forward to personally engaging with community bankers, vendors, and consumer advocates to hear their perspectives on the most productive ways for the Federal Reserve Board to help community banks thrive in this age of innovation.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
TransUnion, "FinTechs Taking Larger Share of Personal Loan Market While Increasing Portfolio Risk-Return Performance," press release, November 2, 2017.
TransUnion, "Fact versus Fiction: Fintech Lenders," (2017) (finding that fintech firms and banks originate 38 percent and 28 percent of personal loans, respectively).
See, for example, Kate Rooney, "Small banks you've never heard of are quietly enabling the tech takeover of the financial industry," CNBC, February 15, 2019.
The primary exception was survey responses regarding mortgage lending, where just under 5 percent of respondents identified fintech firms as a primary source of competition.
See CSBS Community Bank Survey, "Community Banking in the 21st Century (PDF)" (paper presented at the Sixth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, St.
Berger, William Goulding, Tara Rice, "Do small businesses still prefer community banks?," Journal of Banking & Finance 44 (July 2014): 264-278 (finding that small banks may have less strong relationships with small businesses, potentially due to changes in lending technologies and deregulation of the banking industry).
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, FDIC Small Business Lending Survey (PDF) (Washington: FDIC, 2018).
One Missouri bank described how it uses new technologies (and partnerships) to be one of the first banks in its market to offer video banking services.
See, for example, Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, Dallas, Kansas City, Minneapolis, New York, Philadelphia, Richmond, St.
Louis, San Francisco, Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms (PDF) (Federal Reserve System, 2017).
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Browsing to Borrow: "Mom & Pop" Small Business Perspectives on Online Lenders (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, June 2018).
The annual conference is jointly-sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
See also Brooke Holland, "In Case of Emergency, Planning Pays Off for Montecito Bank & Trust After Fire and Debris Flows," Noozhawk, July 29, 2018.
The bank had finalized its disaster relief strategy in 2016, anticipating potential roadway closures and shutdowns from the predicted El Niño season.
See, for example, Karen Gordon Mills and Brayden McCarthy, "The State of Small Business Lending: Credit Access during the Recovery and How Technology May Change the Game (PDF)," Harvard Business School Working Paper 15-004 (Cambridge: Harvard Business School, July 2014).
Results show net satisfaction scores for small banks as 73 percent, large banks as 49 percent, and online lenders as 35 percent.
See Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms in note 8.
See, for example, The Independent Community Bankers of America, Fintech Strategy Roadmap for Community Banks (PDF) (Washington: The Independent Community Bankers of America, March 2018).
The National Risk Committee at the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) warns that, "[f]ailure to appropriately consider innovation and the responsible adoption of technology could pose strategic risk to some banks." See also Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Semiannual Risk Perspective (PDF) (Washington: OCC, Fall 2018).
The OCC has long raised concerns that the strategic risks are particularly acute for community banks as compared to large banks that have the resources to fund innovation labs or even purchase mature fintech firms.
More than two-thirds of respondents to the Conference of State Bank Supervisor's annual survey of community banks reported that they rarely or never rely on in-house technology for online loan applications and other digital products.
Department of Treasury, A Financial System that Creates Economic Opportunities: Nonbank Financials, Fintech, and Innovation (PDF) (Washington: Department of Treasury, July 2018).
"Smaller, nonbank fintech firms and banks have raised concerns that the overall burden of the third-party supervisory regime stifles the ability of new firms to partner with banks.
[C]ommunity banks have expressed concern about their capacity to undertake the requisite due diligence and ongoing vendor management (especially with larger vendors)." Return to text
See, for example, Penny Crosman, "Fiserv-First Data: Why small banks fear big fintech," American Banker, January 16, 2019.

At the Washington Policy Summit sponsored by Institute of International Finance, Washington, D.C.
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in the Institute of International Finance's Washington Policy Summit.
Before we begin our conversation, I want to share a few thoughts about the outlook for the economy and monetary policy.1
economy is in a good place and operating close to both of the Federal Reserve's dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
Real gross domestic product (GDP) rose about 3 percent last year, and in July, just a few months from now, the current economic expansion almost certainly will become the longest on record.
The unemployment rate is near the lowest level recorded in 50 years, and average monthly job gains have continued to outpace the increases needed over the longer run to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force.
Average hourly earnings are showing a welcome increase consistent with a healthy labor market, yet inflation remains near our 2 percent objective.
All that said, the incoming data have revealed signs that U.S.
Prospects for foreign economic growth have been marked down, and important international risks, such as Brexit, remain.
inflation as measured by the core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) price index, which excludes volatile food and energy prices and is a better gauge of underlying inflation pressures, has been muted.
And some indicators of longer-term inflation expectations remain at the low end of a range that I consider consistent with our price-stability mandate.
The considerations I just mentioned have led most private-sector forecasters to project that growth will continue in 2019 but at a somewhat slower pace than in 2018.
At the Federal Reserve, in our most recent Summary of Economic Projections, the median participant on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) projected that in 2019, GDP growth of 2 percent will be the modal, or most likely, outcome; that core PCE inflation will rise to 2 percent; and that the unemployment rate will fall a bit further, to 3.7 percent, by the end of the year.
Again, these are modal outcomes, and, of course, my FOMC colleagues and I should and do factor in risks on either side of these projections in our policy deliberations.
economy, we decided at our March meeting that the current stance of monetary policy is appropriate.2 The federal funds rate is now in the broad range of estimates of neutral--the rate that tends neither to stimulate nor to restrain the economy.
Our baseline economic projections see economic growth for the year as a whole running somewhat above the Committee's median estimate of its longer-run trend and core PCE inflation remaining near our 2 percent objective.
For these reasons, we have indicated we can be patient as we assess what adjustments, if any, will be appropriate to the stance of monetary policy.
At our March meeting, the Committee also released revised Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans, and it announced that the FOMC intends to slow the runoff of our securities starting in May and to cease the runoff entirely in September.3 This decision is the culmination of discussions that we had over the previous four meetings about our operating framework and reflects our desire to converge to a balance sheet that is no larger than it needs to be to conduct monetary policy efficiently and effectively.
In September, reserve balances likely will remain above the minimum level, including a buffer, consistent with this goal.
In that case, we anticipate we will likely hold the size of our balance sheet at the level reached in September for a time thereafter and let the gradual increase in other (nonreserve) liabilities, such as currency, slowly shrink the level of reserves.
Importantly, with this decision on the size of our balance sheet now taken, we can turn our attention in future meetings to discussing and deciding on the maturity composition of our System Open Market Account portfolio.
As you may know, last November the Federal Reserve announced that in 2019 we are undertaking a System review of our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices.
Information about this review can be found on the Federal Reserve Board's website.4 In this review, we will listen to a broad range of stakeholders at public events held around the country, and we will draw on their insights as we assess how best to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability in the most robust fashion possible.
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants.
I am grateful to Brian Doyle of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, March 20.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Balance Sheet Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, March 20.

The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices
At the "Fed Listens: Distributional Consequences of the Cycle and Monetary Policy" Conference hosted by the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota
I am pleased to attend this Fed Listens event on the distributional consequences of the business cycle and monetary policy.
The Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis is a natural venue for discussing this topic in the context of the broad review of our monetary policy framework that we are undertaking this year.1 In our review, we are examining the policy strategy, tools, and communication practices that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) uses to pursue the Fed's dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability.
We are bringing open minds to it and are seeking perspectives from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, such as the panel of researchers we heard from this afternoon and the community leaders we will hear from tomorrow.
To us, it simply seems like good institutional practice to engage broadly with the public in this review as part of a comprehensive approach to enhanced transparency and accountability.2
The Federal Reserve has been charged by the Congress with a dual mandate to achieve maximum employment and price stability, and this review will take this mandate as given.
Moreover, the review will take as given that a 2 percent rate of inflation in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) is the operational goal most consistent with our price stability mandate.
While we believe that our existing framework for conducting monetary policy has served the public well, the purpose of this review is to evaluate and assess ways in which our existing framework might be improved so that we can best achieve our dual mandate objectives on a sustained basis.
That said, based on the experience of other central banks that have undertaken similar reviews, our review is more likely to produce evolution, not a revolution, in the way that we conduct monetary policy.
economy operating at or close to our maximum-employment and price-stability goals, now is an especially opportune time to conduct this review.
The unemployment rate is at a 50-year low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective.
We want to ensure that we are well positioned to continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years.
In addition, the Federal Reserve used new policy tools and enhanced its communication practices in response to the Global Financial Crisis and the Great Recession, and the review will evaluate these changes.
and foreign economies have evolved significantly since the experience that informed much of the pre-crisis approach.
Perhaps most significantly, neutral interest rates appear to have fallen in the United States and abroad.3 Moreover, this global decline in r* is widely expected to persist for years.
The decline in neutral policy rates likely reflects several factors, including aging populations, changes in risk-taking behavior, and a slowdown in technology growth.
These factors' contributions are highly uncertain, but, irrespective of their precise role, the policy implications of the decline in neutral rates are important.
All else being equal, a fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will reach its effective lower bound (ELB) in future economic downturns.
That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to support household spending, business investment, and employment, and keep inflation from falling too low.4
Another key development in recent decades is that inflation appears less responsive to resource slack.
That is, the short-run Phillips curve appears to have flattened, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.5 A flatter Phillips curve is, in a sense, a proverbial double-edged sword.
It permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns‑‑as was the case during and after the Great Recession--because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when the Phillips curve is flatter.6 However, a flatter Phillips curve also increases the cost, in terms of economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations.
Thus, a flatter Phillips curve makes it all the more important that longer-run inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.7
Finally, the strengthening of the labor market in recent years has highlighted the challenges of assessing the proximity of the labor market to the full employment leg of the Federal Reserve's dual mandate.
The unemployment rate, which stood at 3.8 percent in March, has been interpreted by many observers as suggesting that the labor market is currently operating beyond full employment.
However, the level of the unemployment rate that is consistent with full employment is not directly observable and thus must be estimated.
The range of plausible estimates likely extends at least as low as the current level of the unemployment rate.
For example, in the February Blue Chip economic outlook survey, the average estimate of the natural rate of unemployment for the bottom 10 respondents was 3.9 percent, as compared with 4.7 percent for the highest 10 respondents.8
The decline in the unemployment rate in recent years has been accompanied by an increase in labor force participation, with especially pronounced gains for individuals in their prime working years.9 These increases in participation have provided employers with a significant source of additional labor input and may be one factor restraining inflationary pressures.
As with the unemployment rate, whether participation will continue to increase in a tight labor market remains uncertain.
The strong job gains of recent years also has delivered benefits to groups that have historically been disadvantaged in the labor market.
For example, African Americans and Hispanics have experienced persistently higher unemployment rates than whites for many decades.10 However, those unemployment rate gaps have narrowed as the labor market has strengthened, and there is some indication of an extra benefit to these groups as the unemployment rate moves into very low territory.11 Likewise, although unemployment rates for less-educated workers are persistently higher than they are for their more-educated counterparts, such gaps appear to narrow as the labor market strengthens.12 And wage increases in the past couple of years have been strongest for less-educated workers and for those at the lower end of the wage distribution.13
Our existing monetary policy strategy is laid out in the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.14 First adopted in January 2012, the statement has been reaffirmed at the start of each subsequent year, including earlier this year with unanimous support from all 17 FOMC participants.
The statement indicates that the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from 2 percent and deviations of employment from assessments of its maximum level.
In doing so, the FOMC recognizes that these assessments of maximum employment are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision.
According to the Federal Reserve Act, the employment objective is on an equal footing with the inflation objective.
As a practical matter, our current strategy shares many elements with the policy framework known in the research literature as "flexible inflation targeting."15 However, the Fed's mandate is much more explicit about the role of employment than those of most flexible inflation-targeting central banks, and our statement reflects this by stating that when the two sides of the mandate are in conflict, neither one takes precedent over the other.
We believe this transparency about the balanced approach the FOMC takes has served us well over the past decade when high unemployment called for extraordinary policies that entailed some risk of inflation.
The first question is, "Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective?"
Under our current approach as well as that of many central banks around the world, the persistent shortfalls of inflation from 2 percent that many advanced economies have experienced over most of the past decade are treated as "bygones." This means that policy today is not adjusted to offset past inflation shortfalls with future overshoots of the inflation target (nor do persistent overshoots of inflation trigger policies that aim to undershoot the inflation target).
Central banks are generally believed to have effective tools for preventing persistent inflation overshoots, but the effective lower bound on interest rates makes persistent undershoots more likely.
Persistent inflation shortfalls carry the risk that longer-term inflation expectations become poorly anchored or become anchored below the stated inflation goal.16
In part because of that concern, some economists have advocated "makeup" strategies under which policymakers seek to undo, in part or in whole, past inflation deviations from target.
Such strategies include targeting average inflation over a multiyear period and price-level targeting, in which policymakers seek to stabilize the price level around a constant growth path.17 These strategies could be implemented either permanently or as a temporary response to extraordinary circumstances.
For example, the central bank could commit, at the time when the policy rate reaches the ELB, to maintain the policy rate at this level until inflation over the ELB period has, on average, run at the target rate.18 Other makeup strategies seek to reverse shortfalls in policy accommodation at the ELB by keeping the policy rate lower for longer than otherwise would be the case.19 In many models that incorporate the ELB, these makeup strategies lead to better average performance on both legs of the dual mandate and thereby, viewed over time, provide no conflict between the dual-mandate goals.20
The benefits of the makeup strategies rest heavily on households and firms believing in advance that the makeup will, in fact, be delivered when the time comes--for example, that a persistent inflation shortfall will be met by future inflation above 2 percent.
As is well known from the research literature, makeup strategies, in general, are not time consistent because when the time comes to push inflation above 2 percent, conditions at that time will not warrant doing so.
Because of this time inconsistency, the public would have to see a makeup strategy as a credible commitment for it to be successful.
That important real-world consideration is often neglected in the academic literature, in which central bank "commitment devices" are simply assumed to exist and be instantly credible on decree.
Thus, one of the most challenging questions is whether central banks could, in practice, attain the benefits of makeup strategies that are possible in models.
The next question the review will consider is, "Are the existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded? And, if so, how?" The FOMC's primary means of changing the stance of monetary policy is by adjusting its target range for the federal funds rate.
In the fall of 2008, the FOMC cut that target to just above zero in response to financial turmoil and deteriorating economic conditions.
economy required additional policy accommodation after the ELB was reached, the FOMC deployed two additional tools in the years following the crisis: balance sheet policies and forward guidance about the likely path of the federal funds rate.21
The FOMC altered the size and composition of the Fed's balance sheet through a sequence of three large-scale securities purchase programs, via a maturity extension program, and by adjusting the reinvestment of principal payments on maturing securities.
Overall, the empirical evidence suggests that these added tools helped stem the crisis and support economic recovery by strengthening the labor market and lifting inflation back toward 2 percent.
In addition to assessing the efficacy of these existing tools, we will examine additional tools to ease policy when the ELB is binding.
During the crisis and its aftermath, the Federal Reserve considered but ultimately found some of the tools deployed by foreign central banks wanting relative to the alternatives it did pursue.
The third question the review will consider is, "How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?" Our communication practices have evolved considerably since 1994, when the Federal Reserve released the first statement after an FOMC meeting.
Over the past decade or so, the FOMC has enhanced its communication practices to promote public understanding of its policy goals, strategy, and actions, as well as to foster democratic accountability.
These enhancements include the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy; postmeeting press conferences; various statements about principles and strategy guiding the Committee's normalization of monetary policy; and quarterly summaries of individual FOMC participants' economic projections, assessments about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, and judgments of the uncertainty and balance of risks around their projections.23
For example, there might be ways to improve communication about the coordination of policy tools or the interplay between monetary policy and financial stability.
The review will have several components.24 The Board and the Reserve Banks are currently conducting town hall-style Fed Listens events, in which we are hearing from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including business and labor leaders, community development advocates, and academics.
In addition, we are holding a System research conference on June 4-5, 2019, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with speakers and panelists from outside the Fed.
The program includes overviews by academic experts of themes that are central to the review: the FOMC's monetary policy since the financial crisis, assessments of the maximum sustainable level of employment, alternative policy frameworks and strategies to achieve the dual mandate, policy tools, global considerations, financial stability considerations, and central bank communications.
Two sessions will feature panels of community leaders who will share their perspectives on the labor market and the effects of interest rates on their constituencies.
Building on the perspectives we hear and on staff analysis, the FOMC will conduct its own assessment of its monetary policy framework, beginning around the middle of the year.
The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges.
What I can say is that any refinements or more material changes to our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today.
"Okun Revisited: Who Benefits Most from a Strong Economy? (PDF)" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, March 7-8.
"Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"The Signaling Channel for Federal Reserve Bond Purchases (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Great Recession: Estimating the Macroeconomic Effects of a Spread Compression at the Zero Lower Bound (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Pioneering Price Level Targeting: The Swedish Experience 1931-1937," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14.
"Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy," Ben Bernanke's Blog, October 12.
"Inflation and Activity--Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/5/230.
"Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?" Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.
"How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M.
Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol.
"The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy (PDF)," Occasional Paper Series 217.
"The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve (PDF)," speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19.
"Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June.
"Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF), report prepared for the 2017 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3.
"The Macroeconomic Effects of Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes," Economic Journal, vol.
"Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"What Has--and Has Not--Been Learned about Monetary Policy in a Low‐Inflation Environment? A Review of the 2000s," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
"The Federal Reserve's Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects," Economic Journal, vol.
"The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no.
"The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions," IMF Economic Review, vol.
"Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds., Handbook of Economic Forecasting, vol.
"Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework? (PDF)" paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13-14.
"Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? (PDF)" FRBNY Economic Policy Review, vol.
"The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
"The Risky Steady State and the Interest Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-009.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," Journal of International Economics, vol.
"The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Quantitative Easing and Unconventional Monetary Policy--An Introduction," Economic Journal, vol.
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 19887.
"Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on the Nominal Interest Rate (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Average Inflation Targeting," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay? (PDF)" International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"A New Data Set on Monetary Policy: The Economic Forecasts of Individual Members of the FOMC," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Do Inflation-Targeting Central Banks Implicitly Target the Price Level? (PDF)" International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping? (PDF)" in World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.
"Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper Series 23311.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April (revised August 2018).
"The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123.
"Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities," FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25.
"Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," paper presented at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1.
"Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24.
"The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., January 19.
Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework.
They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes to its framework.
For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).
monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).
For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).
One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010).
As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions.
Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.
See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment.
Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation.
Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation.
Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s.
These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.
The box "How Tight Is the Labor Market?" in the Board's February 2018 Monetary Policy Report contains a discussion of some indicators that can be used to assess labor market tightness; see Board of Governors (2018a, pp.
The box "The Labor Force Participation Rate for Prime-Age Individuals" in the Board's July 2018 Monetary Policy Report contains a discussion of recent developments in labor force participation rates for prime-age individuals; see Board of Governors (2018b, pp.
See Cajner and others (2017) for a careful examination of how labor market differentials by race and ethnicity have evolved over time.
See Aaronson and others (2019) for evidence on the relative behavior of unemployment rates by race and ethnicity in a strong labor market.
The authors find similar patterns for labor force participation rates and for employment-to-population ratios.
Disparities in labor market outcomes are also evident between urban and rural areas of the United States.
However, these gaps have not narrowed as the labor market has strengthened.
The box "Employment Disparities between Rural and Urban Areas" in the Board's February 2019 Monetary Policy Report examines these disparities in more detail; see Board of Governors (2019, pp.
Wage gains for workers with different wage levels and with different levels of education can be calculated using data from the Current Population Survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The Economic Policy Institute (2019) provides convenient tabulations of these data.
These risks could be exacerbated if households and businesses expect monetary policy to be insufficiently accommodative because of proximity to the ELB.
Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) provide an early discussion of how optimal monetary policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during the subsequent economic expansion.
Nessén and Vestin (2005) discuss the relationship between average inflation targeting and price-level targeting.
There is a dearth of empirical evidence on strategies seeking to make up for inflation deviations.
Central banks that pursue an inflation goal generally seek to achieve a specific rate of inflation by some time horizon--typically a couple years ahead or over the "medium run"--without regard to past inflation deviations.
One exception is the Reserve Bank of Australia, whose inflation goal is specified as a range of "2-3 per cent, on average, over the medium term" and thus might embed some notion of history dependence.
However, Ruge-Murcia (2014) argues that the drift in the price level in Australia is comparable with the drifts observed in economies with purely forward-looking specification of the inflation goal.
See also Kiley and Roberts (2017) for a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during economic expansions to compensate for below-target realizations of inflation during economic downturns.
See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) for a strategy in which a central bank following a Taylor rule makes up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes by subsequently keeping the policy rate lower than otherwise.
The box "Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules" in the Board's July 2018 Monetary Policy Report contains an application of such a modified rule; see Board of Governors (2018b, pp.
See English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) for applications of flexible price-level targeting and nominal income-targeting strategies to a quantitative model of the U.S.
As an illustration of the shortfall in policy support created by a binding ELB during the Global Financial Crisis, the simple policy rules considered in a January 2017 speech by then-Chair Janet Yellen prescribed setting the federal funds rate between negative 1-1/2 and negative 9 percent; see Yellen (2017).
In addition to using these two additional monetary policy tools, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of other measures to stabilize the financial system, increase households and business confidence, and more generally support the economic recovery.
These supplementary measures included the setting up of several credit facilities and the introduction of stress tests for systemically important financial institutions.
On the transmission channels of balance sheet policies, see D'Amico and others (2012), Joyce and others (2012), Clarida (2012), Woodford (2012), and Bauer and Rudebusch (2014).
On the financial market effects of balance sheet policies, see Gagnon and others (2011), Joyce and others (2011), Hamilton and Wu (2012), D'Amico and King (2013), and Swanson (2017).
For discussions of the macroeconomic effects of these policy actions, see Chen, Cúrdia, and Ferrero (2012); Baumeister and Benati (2013); Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015); Chung and others (2019), and the references therein.
Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve published a summary of individual economic projections from various Board members, FOMC members, or FOMC participants in the semiannual Monetary Policy Report.
With the introduction of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in 2007, the FOMC increased the frequency of the releases of policymaker projections, expanded the set of economic variables included, and extended the forecast horizon.
Because the SEP includes individual contributions of projections and assessments from all FOMC participants, it captures a broader range of views than those of FOMC members.

Thank you to the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) for this opportunity to share my perspective and some of my goals as a Federal Reserve Board governor on issues of interest to you and many in your states.1
I emphasize that word "perspective" because the view from Washington can be very different from how things look in your states and communities.
No one knows that better than I do, of course, because not so long ago, I was sitting where you are, enjoying the dinner provided by CSBS and hearing the perspective from Washington.
And in this position, as part of the Federal Reserve but also still deeply rooted in my experience as a community banker and state regulator, I'll offer my thoughts on forging a closer relationship and strengthening communication between the Board of Governors and state banking commissioners.
First, to establish some context, let me say a few words about the Fed's role and perspective on supervising community banks.
The lion's share of community banks are those with total assets of $500 million or less, with the Fed defining the sector as those with up to $10 billion in assets.
The Federal Reserve directly supervises 731 state-chartered community banks, which is only a small share of the number of state-chartered banks overseen by CSBS members.
The fact that this is only a small share of the total might sound to some people like the Federal Reserve has only a small role in community banking.
But it's important to remember that the Fed is the primary federal supervisor responsible for all bank and thrift holding companies, a total of 3,912.
This includes the vast majority of all community banking organizations.
The Fed also influences the supervision of all community and regional banks by developing both safety and soundness and consumer rules to implement laws passed by Congress, applicable to insured depositories and their holding companies.
Typically this is done in collaboration with other federal agencies and after seeking the public's input.
I mention Congress and these other agencies to emphasize that the Fed shares responsibility for writing and implementing federal regulations for community banks.
In addition to my broader responsibilities in supervision and regulation, I am Chair of the Board's Smaller Regional and Community Banking subcommittee, which oversees our work in this area.
I also participate in carrying out the Federal Reserve's other responsibilities, such as conducting monetary policy and overseeing the payment system.
But it's fair to say that my background in community banking was an important reason I was chosen and confirmed by Congress as the first person to fulfill a new requirement that at least one governor have primary experience working in or supervising community banks.
My background and commitment to community banking is also some important context for what I have to say about the Fed's interests in improving communication with the members of CSBS.
But one thing I have learned, since joining the Board in November, is that my fellow governors, along with the staff at the Board, share your view, as I do, about the vital importance of community banking and the essential role community banks play in our financial system.
Community banks are frequently the economic engines supporting and driving the economies of many communities, especially in rural areas.
They play an indispensable role in areas not served by larger institutions and in other communities of all different sizes, from urban to rural, serving a range of customers, including some that are sometimes not as high a priority for larger banks.
I think it is important to note, and too often overlooked, that the vast majority of community banks managed their risks well in the years leading up to and during the financial crisis and were not the source of the excessive risk taking that caused the crisis.
For this reason among others, the Federal Reserve has been engaged in an active effort to tailor regulations, including those issued in the wake of the financial crisis, to appropriately reflect the potential risk that an institution might pose to financial stability.
Last year's CSBS survey found that community banks reported a decrease in regulatory costs in 2017.2 This was the first reduction in burden reported since the survey began in 2014.
The decline was attributed to the implementation of changes stemming from the recent review by the banking agencies under the EGRPRA, the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act of 1996.
There has been progress in tailoring regulations that affect community banks, and I believe more progress lies ahead as we implement the changes that Congress included in S.
Before I go further, let me give a brief assessment of how community banks are faring.
This might seem like an issue that is primarily of interest to community bankers and regulators, but I don't look at it that way at all.
One of my most important responsibilities now is voting on the monetary policy decisions of the Federal Open Market Committee, and that requires me to closely and constantly monitor the health of the U.S.
And when community banks are the source for more than half of all lending to small businesses, which together account for two-thirds of private sector job creation, then the health of community banking has a big influence on the health of the U.S.
Over those years and today, the large majority of community banks have maintained sound levels of capital.
Although the number of community banks in the United States continues to fall due to consolidation, overall the sector continues to post strong earnings, which, in turn, contribute to maintaining healthy capital positions.
One measure of this strong financial position is that no community banks failed in 2018.
The shared responsibility we have as financial supervisors to ensure the ongoing viability of community banks requires cooperation and coordination.
We must continue to ensure that the institutions we supervise are proactively managing their risks to remain strong.
It's our job to identify emerging risks to community banks and to ensure bankers are identifying and managing their risks appropriately.
We want to ensure that loans are underwritten prudently and that bankers are actively managing the concentrations of credit risk in their portfolios.
We welcome the strong lending growth that many community banks are experiencing, which is fueling job creation and sustaining our economic expansion, which in July will become the longest in U.S.
But strong lending growth must be supported by prudent, well-managed funding plans in order to manage the risk that strains on liquidity may arise more quickly than is sometimes anticipated.
First, it is very much my approach to government service, and leadership in particular, to do a lot of listening.
When I became Kansas' State Bank Commissioner, I started a twice-yearly series of roundtables with the chief executives of banks across the state.
It was an excellent way for me to better understand the issues that were impacting bankers in a way that was less formal than when banks comment on rules and less fraught than the supervisory process.
The second, very straightforward reason to foster better communication with all of you is that the nature of financial regulation and supervision in the United States argues strongly for better coordination.
To a much greater extent than in other nations, in the United States financial oversight is divided between the federal government and subnational authorities--the states.
At the federal level, responsibility is further divided between different agencies, such as the Fed, the FDIC, the Office of Comptroller of the Currency, and the National Credit Union Administration.
This system evolved over time, and as things stand, there are some advantages to this specialization.
But this division of labor may, at times, inhibit information sharing, and as a general principle, better communication can help overcome this challenge.
More specifically, better communication and information sharing between state banking commissioners and the Federal Reserve can further improve the early identification and resolution of emerging issues at community banks.
Harnessing and sharing these sometimes divergent views can serve to strengthen a financial regulatory system that shares responsibility among many state and federal agencies.
Better communication and information sharing will benefit both you and the Federal Reserve, but my motivation is that the Fed has much to gain here.
Because states are responsible for chartering and co-supervising the large majority of community banks, they can provide a broader perspective into local community banking issues and trends.
Let me pause here for a moment and say that improving communication doesn't necessarily mean that the Federal Reserve and the CSBS members will always agree.
I will cite one example that I know is on the minds of many of you--the rulemaking process the agencies are currently engaged in on the community bank leverage ratio (CBLR).
It is also my intention to be on the road a lot, visiting Federal Reserve Districts and talking to bankers, consumers, and community groups.
My final reason for better communication brings me back to a point I made at the outset: the United States needs a strong community-banking sector.
We need strong community banks because they help support strong communities.
They provide safety, education and economic opportunities, and help define the values we hold dear.
The credit they extend helps preserve farming as a way of life for American families, and provides the means for small businesses to start and to thrive, which is so important to the health of communities.
As a community banker, I have seen how access to credit and support from a financial institution with deep roots in a community can make a direct and immediate difference in people's lives.
I continued to feel that way when I did the job you do, as a state banking commissioner, helping ensure that families and communities have access to financial services that are so important to their success.
I enjoyed being a community banker, and I hope you know I've enjoyed working closely with all of you as a banking commissioner, and I now look forward to building a stronger partnership between all of you and the Federal Reserve Board.
My views are my own and do not represent the view of the Board of Governors or its other members.
Federal Reserve System, Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., 2018 Community Banking in the 21st Century (PDF) (Research and Policy Conference, October 3-4, 2018).

Vice Chair for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K.
At the 2019 European Bank Executive Committee Forum "The Future of Banking: The Human Factor," Brussels, Belgium
I am grateful for the chance to speak with such a diverse and distinguished group of academics, industry leaders, and colleagues in regulation and central banking.
Conversations like these always remind me that, while we all approach our roles in the financial sector differently, we share a deeper commitment to a common goal: a safe, stable, and resilient financial system, capable of supporting strong and sustainable economic growth.
The financial regulatory community worked frantically to repair the vulnerabilities that the global financial crisis exposed and to address a set of financial risks that failed to respect national borders.
The financial system we have today bears the imprint of our response a decade ago.
Levels of capital and liquidity at the largest banks are now higher, and with reforms to recovery and resolution, the risks and potential costs of a catastrophic failure of a major institution are lower.
These are profound accomplishments of international cooperation, which returned the global financial system from the brink of collapse to stability and health.
On the contrary, as the G20 leaders said in creating the Financial Stability Board (FSB), "a sense of normalcy should not lead to complacency."1
The FSB exists to help sustain the common efforts made in the throes of the crisis--to identify and address systemic vulnerabilities, to develop stronger regulatory and supervisory policies, and to create a more resilient global financial system.
It is a platform, and a place for its 24 members and 73 representatives to coordinate their work; to identify and address issues that span financial products, intermediaries, and markets; and to avoid the pre-crisis regulatory fragmentation that left financial stability risks unaddressed.
Regulatory cooperation has long been essential to financial stability--not only because it fosters consistency in global rules, but also because it fosters trust.
When authorities develop new policy together, when they identify common standards and implement them in their home countries, and when they plan and debate the nature of emerging risks, they also develop a common understanding of each other's work and a common approach to addressing new problems.
The FSB can begin this work at home, by strengthening the role of the regional groups that are already part of the organization.
The intent was to expand our outreach beyond the membership of the G20 and to better reflect the FSB's global mission and impact.
Today, the groups meet once or twice a year and help the FSB obtain broader input into its policy development agenda.
They can, and should, have the opportunity to do more--not only to promote implementation of international policy initiatives but also to give a clear view of financial stability developments in their respective regions.
We can also engage more effectively outside the FSB--with businesses, public institutions, market participants, and scholars--and give the public the means and the opportunity to provide meaningful feedback on our work.
We established a new expectation that all FSB policy recommendations will be open for at least 60 days of public comment, instead of the shorter periods used in the past.
We began a recent effort around the differences in regulatory environments and market conditions across jurisdictions--known as "market fragmentation"--by convening key stakeholders and academics for a full-day workshop, which I hope will be the rule for future projects, not the exception.
Their contours and their impact also vary across national boundaries, from mobile wallets in Kenya, to online mortgages in the United States, to money market funds founded by technology companies in China.
I will continue to seek ways to invite and encourage engagement during my chairmanship, and to give the public a clearer and fuller view of FSB's decisionmaking process.
The first prong of our mandate, now a decade old, is to "assess vulnerabilities affecting the global financial system, and identify and review .
."4 The FSB's primary role, and its principal contribution to international financial regulation, is to look forward--to see past the issues and practices of the day, and identify new vulnerabilities, long before they lead to widespread economic distress.
The FSB's Standing Committee on Assessment of Vulnerabilities (under the leadership of FSB Vice Chair Klaas Knot of De Nederlandsche Bank, here today) is an important forum and catalyst for this work.
Their efforts will rely on transparent engagement with a wide range of stakeholders--including banks and nonbank financial institutions, the academic community, financial regulators, national authorities, and standard-setting bodies.
Nonbank financing has grown since the financial crisis, and it has been a source of systemic risk, often involving high leverage, maturity and liquidity mismatches, opaque structures, and concentrated holdings of risky assets.
Nonbank financing can also lead to lower lending standards, bidding up the price of risky assets and sending an encouraging signal to credit underwriters.
These channels played a role in the recent global financial crisis, and more recently, new forms of interconnectedness between nonbank financial firms and the banking system have emerged.
Is the growth of nonbank financing altering existing market structures? Are there new vulnerabilities in the financial system? How will nonbank financing develop, and how should it do so? The FSB is taking a variety of complementary approaches to answering these questions.
First, we produce an annual report that outlines the developments in nonbank financing, detailing global trends and potential risks and providing reliable information to foster public discussion.
Second, the FSB develops policies to promote the resilience of these firms (without impeding the growth of sustainable nonbank financing models), and we work closely with other multinational organizations to monitor implementation.
The same spirit of self-reflection should guide the FSB's efforts in other policy areas.
Yet identifying those risks before a crisis means dealing in uncertainty, and making policy on evolving issues, where no one can claim complete expertise.
As I have described elsewhere, the FSB is launching a global study with multinational policymakers to start answering these important questions as part of its broader effort to evaluate the effects of post-crisis reforms.
We intend to bring analytical rigor to these questions, and we recognize that the academic community has undertaken much work in this area.
The work of the FSB reflects the fact that, in a global financial system, we cannot see and address emerging problems alone.
To avoid reopening them--and returning to a fragmented international regime--we will have to recommit to collaboration, embrace insight where it emerges, and follow evidence where it leads.
Quarles, "The Financial Stability Board in 2019" (speech at the Joint Conference of the European Central Bank and the Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Frankfurt, Germany, March 28, 2019).

At "Strategic Approaches to the Fed's Balance Sheet and Communications" Spring 2019 Meeting of the Manhattan Institute's Shadow Open Market Committee, New York, New York
It is a pleasure to address the Manhattan Institute's Shadow Open Market Committee (SOMC) today.1 The SOMC has long served as an important forum for debate regarding the appropriate stance of monetary policy--debates that have often brought alternative perspectives to the challenges facing the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in the pursuit of its dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices.
As Allan Meltzer wrote about his and Karl Brunner's founding of the SOMC, "Our objective at the time and after was not just to complain about the results of policy actions.
This afternoon, I will briefly remark on the economic outlook and the current stance of monetary policy, and I would then like to devote some time to a discussion of the approach the Federal Reserve has taken on the setting of the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) and why I see a setting of 0 percent, as recently affirmed by the Board, as the current appropriate setting for the CCyB.
Also, I will review some of the international experience with the CCyB.
Given that the CCyB is a relatively new element of our regulatory toolkit, the international experience has the potential to provide useful information on how the CCyB can be made most effective.
At last week's meeting, the FOMC left the policy rate unchanged and reiterated its patient approach toward future policy adjustments.3 I supported this decision.
It is prudent at this point to watch the evolution of the incoming data in determining the appropriate stance of policy, particularly given some indication that growth has slowed, at least temporarily, in the most recent data.
That said, I remain optimistic about the outlook for the U.S.
economy, and I think that we have the potential to maintain growth at a healthy pace in the years ahead.
While I would not suggest ignoring this decline, it does seem rather inconsistent with a number of other indicators, including the continued strength of the labor market and wage gains in recent months.
Even with a weak reading in February, the three-month average gain in payrolls, at 186,000, remains above most estimates of the pace of job gains needed to maintain downward pressure on an already historically low unemployment rate.
That said, weak February payrolls are another reason to continue patiently watching the data to see how economic conditions evolve.
Looking past the near-term data, I see many reasons to expect relatively strong growth in the coming years, supported by gains in the productive capacity of the economy.
Regarding the inputs of production, I have been encouraged by the increase in labor force participation over the past year.
After a period of subdued growth, investment was also strong last year, with spending on equipment and intangibles rising 7-1/2 percent, increasing the capital stock and adding to the productive potential of the economy.
Most important, I have been encouraged by the recent step-up in labor productivity growth.
Last year's increase of almost 2 percent marked the strongest growth since the immediate aftermath of the financial crisis and was well above the 1 percent pace that prevailed in the preceding five years.
I think there are many reasons to believe that this faster productivity growth could be persistent.
My expectation for further increases in capital spending is one.
For another, it could be that tight labor markets have played a role in boosting labor productivity growth as employers work to increase efficiency as new workers become harder to find.
But I do not believe that the seeming unresponsiveness of inflation to the apparent tightness of the labor market and other aspects of the economy tells the whole story in evaluating slack versus constraint in the economy.
Of the many explanations for this phenomenon that have been offered, one possibility that we have to keep in mind is that inflation has remained stable precisely because of the public's confidence that the Fed will maintain a framework that keeps the economy from overheating and inflation from rising significantly above the 2 percent benchmark.
Inflation could then for some time remain quite stable in the face of an economy running hot.
But if public confidence began to erode because of Fed inaction, a possible consequence could be the de-anchoring of inflation expectations, rather than a gradual and controlled move to an inflation rate sustainably around our 2 percent goal.
Of course, there are a variety of alternative explanations for the current surprising relationship between inflation and unemployment, and perhaps all of them are part of a full account.
We should also be wary of a material and durable downward drift in inflation expectations below our objective, were we to see that develop, perhaps due to secular changes in the formation of prices or perceived constraints on the ability of monetary policy to react to future downturns.
Either way, as a matter of prudent risk management, we must conduct policy in a manner consistent with keeping inflation near target, validating the public's trust in our commitment to our inflation objective and keeping inflation expectations anchored.
That said, my sense is that further increases in the policy rate may be necessary at some point, a stance I believe is consistent with my optimistic view of the economy's growth potential and momentum.
In the language of central banking, my estimate of the neutral policy rate remains somewhat north of where we are now.
Communicating a data-dependent policy framework can be challenging, especially if we do not want to appear to be overly discretionary.
It would probably be clearest if we defined what data we are dependent on and how we depended on those data--that is to say, if we adopted a monetary policy rule.
Indeed, while rules provide useful and important benchmarks, the complexity and evolving nature of the economy at the current juncture argue for the consideration of a wide range of indicators in assessing the state of that economy.
This, in turn, can complicate the communication of data dependence: How can we adopt and convey a clear strategic stance on policy while maintaining our credibility if evolution of the data requires an evolution of that strategy?
Let me now shift gears and return to the CCyB, beginning with how it fits within our broad set of efforts to promote financial stability.
The core of that approach has been to establish a set of structural, through-the-cycle regulatory and supervisory standards to ensure resilience against a broad range of shocks.
In contrast to the pre-crisis framework, banks, especially the largest and most systemic banks, are now required to maintain substantially higher and higher-quality loss-absorbing capital and other cushions; stress testing examines the resilience of large banks to severely adverse economic conditions; liquidity requirements and regulatory incentives to limit reliance on short-term wholesale funding have reduced funding risk among large banks and their affiliated broker-dealers; and resolution planning requirements reduce the risks that the failure of a large firm would spill into the broader economy.
Outside of the banking system, money market mutual fund reform has reduced this sector's susceptibility to destabilizing runs by investors, and requirements that many derivatives be centrally cleared have decreased the opacity and interconnectedness that contributed to the chaos of 2008.
In addition to these through-the-cycle measures, the Federal Reserve actively monitors for the buildup of financial stability vulnerabilities and can require large banks to increase their loss-absorbing capacity through increases in the CCyB when systemic vulnerabilities are sufficiently large.
While such countercyclical tools are new, their goal is to mitigate the buildup of vulnerabilities during buoyant periods, since experience has proven time and again that vulnerabilities can build during good times as risk appetite grows and memories of earlier instability fade.
Effectively mitigating the buildup of risk through the CCyB requires a systematic framework for analyzing vulnerabilities and a mapping of such changes in financial-sector risks into the appropriate level for the CCyB.
The Board developed its framework outlining the objectives of the tool and the factors that would influence the determination of its appropriate level through a process of public consultation.5
Under our policy, the primary objective for activating the CCyB is to build financial-sector resilience during periods when the risks to financial stability have risen to meaningfully above normal levels and there is an elevated possibility of potential losses within the banking sector that could place strains on the supply of credit or otherwise substantially impede economic and financial activity.
A secondary objective for using the CCyB is its potential to limit the buildup of financial vulnerabilities by slowing the rate of credit expansion--that is, the possibility that the CCyB may "lean against the wind" of credit fluctuations.
This secondary objective, both in the original Basel discussions and in the Federal Reserve's framework, is less central.
Because we set high, through-the-cycle capital requirements in the United States that provide substantial resilience to normal fluctuations in economic and financial conditions, it is appropriate to set the CCyB at zero in a normal risk environment.
When, then, would it be appropriate--given this framework--to activate the CCyB? That is, how do we know when financial vulnerabilities are elevated? The Federal Reserve continuously monitors vulnerabilities, as highlighted in our recent Financial Stability Report.6 Our approach is organized around tracking four broad vulnerabilities that academic research and practical experience have shown can amplify negative shocks and result in outsized losses in the real economy.
These are asset valuation pressures, household and business debt, funding risk, and financial-sector leverage.
As part of this process, the Board considers a number of quantitative indicators--one of which is the credit-to-GDP (gross domestic product) gap proposed in the Basel Committee guidance--that are indicative of potential vulnerabilities.
Nonetheless, judgment must play an important role in this process, especially in assessing how interactions between vulnerabilities may serve to mute or amplify the transmission of different kinds of shocks.
The framework requires further judgment as to whether the CCyB is the most appropriate tool to address the particular areas of concern, which will depend on, among other things, the extent to which banks subject to the CCyB are exposed to vulnerabilities or contributing to them.
Asset valuations increased to the high end of their historical ranges in many markets over 2017 and the first half of 2018, supported by the solid economic expansion and an apparent increase in investors' appetite for risk.
The market volatility and subsequent rebound have muddied the picture somewhat; however, it does seem that valuation pressures have eased to some extent in a particular locus of concern, the market for leveraged loans--that is, syndicated loans to lower-rated or unrated borrowers with already significant debt loads.
Now, regarding debt outstanding, borrowing by businesses has reached a historically high level relative to the size of the economy or business assets and there are also signs of deteriorating underwriting standards.
Of course, this has happened at a time when corporate profits relative to the size of the economy are also quite high, mitigating some of the concern this might suggest--but the riskiest forms of business debt have increased the most amid such signs.
These developments could potentially leave the corporate sector vulnerable to a sharp slowing in economic growth, although we think the banking sector has only limited direct exposures to such borrowers and, to the extent they can be measured, indirect exposures are also limited.
The notable levels of vulnerability in asset valuation pressures and business borrowing must be considered alongside modest vulnerabilities associated with household borrowing and the historically low levels of financial-sector leverage and funding risk.
Household debt relative to GDP has fallen substantially from the level of a decade ago, and the credit quality of household borrowing remains relatively solid, despite pockets of weakness evident in some areas of auto lending.
Even more important, banks now have substantially higher-quality capital and more of it than in the 2000s, owing importantly to the structural reform of capital requirements and stress testing.
In fact, under last year's stress tests, capital levels at the largest U.S.
banks after a hypothetical severe global recession would have been higher than the actual capital levels of large banks in the years before the crisis.
Moreover, around 20 percent of the assets of the most systemically important financial institutions are highly liquid assets that can be sold quickly in the event of stress.
And, following reforms to money market mutual funds and other steps, the volume of short-term uninsured funding, most prone to runs, is well below pre-crisis levels.
Taken as a whole, financial system vulnerabilities strike me as being not outside their normal range, which is consistent with a zero CCyB under the Board's framework and is why I supported the Board's decision to keep the CCyB at zero earlier this month.
While policymakers in the United States have maintained the CCyB at zero since 2016, other countries have adjusted their countercyclical buffers in response to vulnerabilities within their financial sectors.
Currently, 13 countries have announced a CCyB above zero, ranging from 0.25 percent in Luxembourg to 2.5 percent in Hong Kong, Norway, and Sweden.7 The CCyB is a novel approach to financial regulation, and I think it is important that we, as regulators, learn from other countries' experiences with the CCyB.
I see three important explanations for differences in the CCyB across countries.
Perhaps the most important and direct reason for different CCyB levels among different countries is that they face different vulnerabilities.
According to national authorities' announcements, the decisions to activate the buffers were generally motivated by credit growth, household debt, and housing prices; in this regard, it is notable that mortgage credit or house prices have expanded rapidly in several countries deploying the CCyB, including Hong Kong and the Nordic countries that have set their CCyB at 2.5 percent.
For example, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority's decision to increase the CCyB level to 2.5 percent in January 2018 was importantly linked to housing developments.
Another explanation for the differences in observed CCyB levels across countries is the range of available macroprudential tools to stem the buildup in financial vulnerabilities in different countries and the degree to which such tools have been the preferred means for addressing identified vulnerabilities.8 For example, housing market booms, as noted above for Hong Kong, have been a concern in several countries in recent years.9 Accordingly, some national authorities have used macroprudential tools focused on housing, such as caps on loan-to-value ratios, to try to increase the resilience of borrowers and to indirectly strengthen the resilience of the banks and the financial system should their housing booms turn to busts.
For example, policymakers in Canada have not activated the CCyB in response to concerns about housing market risks, but they have lowered the maximum loan-to-value ratio for various mortgage products and capped debt-service-to-income ratios.10 The availability of such alternative tools for limiting systemic risk may be among the factors influencing the decision to adjust, or not adjust, the CCyB in a number of countries.
In this regard, it is notable that the set of macroprudential tools in the United States is limited relative to that in many other countries.11
Finally, another difference, one that is particular to the United Kingdom, is the framework adopted by the U.K.
Financial Policy Committee (FPC) to integrate the CCyB with its structural capital requirements.
Specifically, under the FPC's framework, the CCyB would equal 1 percent in standard risk conditions--but to avoid having this be a significant increase to already very high levels of capital, the FPC undertook a one-time adjustment to its other capital buffers in order to offset part of this increase.
The effect of the policy is that the buffer can be varied--both up and down--in line with the changing risks that the banking system faces over time.
This approach is an interesting deviation from the idea in the original Basel discussions and the framework adopted in many other jurisdictions, in which structural capital requirements are set at levels aimed to deliver the desired level of resilience, with the CCyB raised to positive values only at times when vulnerabilities are above normal.
As I examine this experience, systems similar to the United Kingdom's, where the CCyB is positive during normal times, may allow policymakers to react more quickly to economic, financial, or even geopolitical shocks that occur amid otherwise normal conditions, without relying on the slow-moving credit aggregates contemplated in the original Basel proposal.
Moreover, this setting of the CCyB permits more gradual adjustments in the CCyB, especially in periods with a high degree of uncertainty about the level of financial vulnerabilities.
Another possible benefit of a system that has additional flexibility is the ability to coordinate the setting of the CCyB with the setting of monetary policy in situations where such coordination is valuable.
At the same time, I would not expect such situations to be the norm, as the objectives and governance of monetary policy and macroprudential policies are separate for good reasons.
In the United States, we have built a substantially safer financial system by focusing on using structural tools that confer through-the-cycle resilience.
The overall capital framework in the United States has been designed to ensure high capital levels without having to activate the CCyB, with the implication being that the bar for activation would be a high one; but, as a result, much of the time there would not be any buffer to reduce if conditions were to precipitously deteriorate.
The United Kingdom's approach to setting the CCyB also relies on having a high overall level of capital during normal times, but, by "swapping" some portion of static capital for CCyB in reaching that high capital level during normal times, and thus making some of that capital part of a releasable buffer, U.K.
With the CCyB in active use around the world, I am confident that the academic and policy communities will learn a great deal about how best to use this new tool to build a more resilient financial system.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Meltzer (2000), "The Shadow Open Market Committee: Origins and Operations," Journal of Financial Services Research, vol.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, March 20.
Quarles (2018), "Don't Chase the Needles: An Optimistic Assessment of the Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York Luncheon, New York, October 18.
In December 2015, the Board invited public comment on a proposed policy statement describing the framework that the Board would use to set the amount of the U.S.
See Regulation Q--Capital Adequacy of Bank Holding Companies, Savings and Loan Holding Companies, and State Member Banks, 12 C.F.R.
See also Federal Reserve System (2016), "Regulatory Capital Rules: The Federal Reserve Board's Framework for Implementing the U.S.
Basel III Countercyclical Capital Buffer," proposed policy statement with request for public comment (Docket No.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), Financial Stability Report (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, November).
See International Monetary Fund, Financial Stability Board, and Bank for International Settlements (2016), IMF-FSB-BIS, Elements of Effective Macroprudential Policies: Lessons from International Experience (PDF) (Basel, Switzerland: IMF, FSB, and BIS, , (August 2016).
See International Monetary Fund (2018), Source: IMF, Global Financial Stability Report, (Washington: IMF, October 2018).
See Bank of Canada (2017), Financial System Review (PDF), (Ottawa: BOCBank of Canada, November 2017).
See Swiss National Bank (2013), "Countercyclical Capital Buffer: Proposal of the Swiss National Bank and Decision of the Federal Council," (PDF)press release, February 13.
Elliott, Greg Feldberg, and Andreas Lehnert (2013), "The History of Cyclical Macroprudential Policy in the United States," (PDF) Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-29 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May 2013).

At the Ag Lenders Conference, sponsored by The Independent Community Bankers Association of New Mexico, Deming, New Mexico
It is a pleasure to be here today to discuss the important role agriculture plays in our economy, a role that is supported by many community banks.
I would like to thank the Independent Community Bankers Association and their New Mexico state association for inviting me to participate in the conversation we will have today.
And because I see community bankers as playing a vital role in this sector, I'll explain why I believe the community banking model is well-suited to supporting agricultural businesses.
Finally, I will highlight the Federal Reserve's approach to supervising agricultural banks.
As many of you know, before joining the Federal Reserve, I worked at a community bank that primarily served ranchers and farmers and the businesses that support them.
More recently, as Kansas state bank commissioner, I supervised many banks whose business and customers were closely connected to the land and the people who work it.
I now have the honor of being the first governor to fill the role designated for someone with community banking experience on the Federal Reserve Board, a position that was created by statute in 2015.1 I plan to fulfill this unique responsibility by traveling widely and listening closely to community bankers, consumers, farmers, ranchers, and dairy farmers--all of the stakeholders with an interest in our work.
And in the process, I hope to help you better understand the role of the Federal Reserve and what we are trying to accomplish.
The Federal Reserve's monetary policy mandate is twofold: to promote maximum employment and stable prices.
To do that, we continuously monitor the health of the U.S.
economy in general, and because of its sizable share of overall activity, the agricultural sector in particular.
agriculture and its related industries support about 22 million jobs in the United States and produce close to 10 percent of our exports.2 A healthy farm economy also supports many rural and regional economies.
We track commodity prices, ag credit, and exports as factors that influence our outlook on inflation and economic growth.
As bank supervisors, we work to ensure safe and sound banking practices.
We also monitor trends in asset quality and risk-management practices at agricultural banks as part of our ongoing assessment of the level and direction of risk at these financial institutions and within the agricultural economy.
Earlier this week, I had the privilege of welcoming farm sector leaders to the Federal Reserve Board in Washington, where we hosted the 2019 National Agricultural Credit Conference.
For nearly 80 years, this conference has brought together leaders in this sector to discuss important issues related to farm credit.
Attendees at this year's conference recognized that, while the outlook for the farm economy in 2019 may be similar to a year ago, there are ongoing concerns that increasing stress on producers could lead to repayment difficulties.
As noted in recent Federal Reserve System Beige Books, higher tariffs on soybeans and other U.S.
exports and continued uncertainty over trade policy represent headwinds for American producers.
While it is important to understand regional trends, I would like to focus this morning on some overarching themes that have emerged in recent years.
Recently, a great deal of attention understandably has been paid to an increase in the number of U.S.
While this is, of course, an important indicator to watch, it's equally important to note that the rise over the past few years has been fairly modest.
The Federal Reserve tracks these developments closely because of their potential implications for both the economy and banking supervision.
In the 1970s, farm income in the United States had advanced rapidly as exports surged.
The broad increase in farm income led to a significant rise in capital investments in the years that followed.
Farm incomes dropped, profits declined rapidly, and liquidity in the U.S.
High interest rates in the early 1980s, in response to the Great Inflation, contributed to the stress.3 Despite the reductions in profits and liquidity, capital spending remained elevated in the early 1980s, and was financed with higher levels of debt made possible by rising land values.
The result was a sharp increase in farm bankruptcies and a number of bank failures.
That said, there are some important differences between the 1980s and today.
With current inflation low and stable, interest rates are substantially lower than in the 1980s, and overall leverage has been less pronounced.
The combination of relatively low interest rates and modest debt levels has resulted in more-manageable debt service requirements for many agricultural borrowers.5
Some farm operations have faced significant financial stress, and it is important to recognize that there are still risks.
Farmland prices are quite high, and working capital continues to decline.
However, returns at banks with a concentration in agriculture have generally remained healthy, as most producers have continued to make loan payments despite weakening revenue streams.
Let me shift focus now to the role of banks, particularly community banks, in the U.S.
Community banks foster strong long-term relationships with farmers, ranchers, and others involved in the local business of agriculture.
Often, these relationships are cultivated through community bankers' service on local civic and business organizations or by participation with local farmers and their families in activities to support the local community and economy.
Agricultural community banks and agricultural borrowers share a common goal of serving and strengthening their local communities.
Frequently, community bankers' ties to local agricultural businesses include running family farms, ranches, orchards, and dairies.
In other instances, members of the boards of directors that help to oversee community banks are heavily involved in the business of agriculture.
These close connections to local agricultural businesses provide community banks with a unique and important perspective in helping to meet local agricultural credit needs.
Additionally, community banks can be more agile than their larger competitors, as they employ lenders with a deep understanding of local products and conditions and are able to offer customized funding options in response to changing lending conditions.
As bank supervisors, we pay close attention to the performance of all banks, including agricultural banks.
Before we start our conversation today, I would like to discuss how the Federal Reserve approaches bank supervision with a focus on agriculture lending and the challenges our farmers and the community banks that support these operations are facing.
There are approximately 1,400 "agricultural banks" in the United States, all of which play a vital role in providing rural producers with access to credit.6 Agricultural banks hold approximately 50 percent of all agricultural loans outstanding at U.S.
Additionally, agricultural banks have more challenging funding structures given the seasonal funding needs of their agricultural customers and the difficulty of attracting deposits at rural institutions.
This combination of a cyclical deposit base, lower inflows of deposits into rural community banks, and growing loan demand from agricultural borrowers has resulted in a greater dependence on borrowed funds to support the recent growth in agricultural lending.
Approximately one-third of all agricultural banks are highly concentrated agricultural banks, and the number of these banks has declined slightly over the past several years--from 479 in December 2016 to 449 in September 2018.
Although there are some unique risks and challenges for highly concentrated agricultural banks and their supervisors, these banks also generally remain in sound financial condition.
And capital levels and liquidity metrics at most ag banks are generally in line with other banks that do not share these concentrations.
While concentrated agricultural banks are currently operating with adequate capital ratios, regulators continue to closely monitor capital levels and to encourage prudent capital planning and concentration risk management, given the potential for unforeseen challenges and emerging risks associated with agricultural lending.
With respect to liquidity, as previously noted, rapid asset growth can strain a bank's liquidity position if its funding sources turn out to be unstable.
As supervisors, we work with bankers to understand their liquidity planning process, their challenges around attracting deposits, and the risks associated with potentially relying too heavily on noncore sources of funding.
We have observed the increasing pressure on community banks to compete for deposits; however, we still see many community banks overcoming this challenge and effectively competing for deposits in their communities.
Another key component of all community bank examinations is a focus on asset quality.
Financial indicators for agriculture banks remain at manageable levels as highlighted by the nonperforming agricultural loans to total loans ratio of 1.36 percent as of September 2018.
In addition to the traditional focus on the financial factors related to agricultural lending, the Federal Reserve has provided examiners with helpful insights into the appropriate treatment of agricultural carryover debt.
And this is particularly true for highly concentrated agricultural banks, where maintaining enhanced agricultural credit risk-management practices to facilitate prudent underwriting, early detection of problems, and well-thought-out restructuring plans for agricultural borrowers are imperative to limiting losses and maintaining a sound banking institution.
In 2011, the Federal Reserve also issued guidance to the industry on key risk factors in agricultural lending and supervisory expectations for a financial institution's risk-management practices.7 This guidance applies in all economic environments, but it is especially important in periods of economic stress, because it reminds bankers that the identification of a troubled borrower does not prohibit a banker from working with the borrower.
Many banks engaged in agricultural lending are located in communities where farming is the primary economic driver, and simply pushing every borrower with challenges out of the bank does not benefit the long-term interests of the bank or the community it serves.
The Federal Reserve recognizes the benefits when lenders work prudently with troubled borrowers in a way that serves the long-term interests of all stakeholders.
A close working relationship between farmers and agricultural lenders is essential to the economic growth of agricultural borrowers and the continued success of many rural communities.
As such, it is important for the Federal Reserve to continue to tailor effective supervision and regulation to ensure the safety and soundness of agricultural banks, while also making sure that undue burden does not constrain the capacity of these institutions to continue supporting the agricultural communities that they serve.
See U.S Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service at https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/ag-and-food-statistics-charting-the-essentials/ag-and-food-sectors-and-the-economy/.
Powell, "Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy" (speech at Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy, a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 24, 2018).
Department of Agriculture, Economic Research Service, "Highlights from the March 2019 Farm Income Forecast." Return to text
Cortney Cowley and Ty Kreitman, "Farmland Values Stable, but Risks to Outlook Remain," Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, February 14, 2019.
Agricultural banks are defined as banks with farm production and farm real estate loans equal to 25 percent or more of total loans.
See Supervision and Regulation SR Letter 11-14, "Supervisory Expectations for Risk Management of Agriculture Credit Risk." Return to text

It is a pleasure to be here at the Banque de France and take part in this important symposium on the "Euro Area: Staying the Course through Uncertainties."1
Both in the financial press and in international policy circles, one hears a great deal about the spillovers of U.S.
One hears somewhat less, though, about how global shocks affect the U.S.
economy.2 So, in my remarks today, I will discuss how the U.S.
economy's increasing integration with the rest of the world has made it more exposed to foreign shocks, and I will focus in particular on the channels of transmission through which these shocks operate.
I will close with a few words on current prospects, in which global crosscurrents are again posing challenges for the U.S.
Greater Integration between the United States and the Rest of the World
exports and imports have about tripled as a share of gross domestic product (GDP), with their sum now about 30 percent of GDP--still relatively small by international standards, but certainly notable.
The United States has had open capital markets for a long time, but the sum of U.S.
And, reflecting the greater integration of global financial markets, the correlation of U.S.
and foreign equity and bond markets has trended broadly upward for several decades.3
This increased integration I have described has heightened the exposure of the U.S.
But what are the channels of transmission of these shocks to the United States?
For concreteness, let us consider the case of a negative demand shock originating abroad, such as a foreign recession.
First, this shock affects the United States through direct trade links, lowering demand for U.S.
Second, the foreign recession leads to lower interest rates abroad and, other things being equal, raises the value of the dollar, which in turn lowers U.S.
The extent to which foreign worries lead to safe-haven flows may add to the dollar's strength.
Let me first elaborate on the exchange rate channel I just mentioned.
The traditional determinants of exchange rates--that is, differentials in expected rates of return--apply to the United States as to other countries.
economy is different because of the special role of U.S.
As a consequence, an adverse foreign shock that damped the demand for risky assets would be expected to trigger safe-haven flows that boost the dollar, weighing on the U.S.
markets might well also push down equity prices and widen corporate credit spreads, adding to the contractionary pressures.
However, the same safe-haven flows into Treasury securities would cause U.S.
Let us consider some historical examples of the effect of adverse foreign shocks on the U.S.
The Mexican peso crisis of 1994 and '95 and the Asian financial crisis of 1997 through '98 resulted in substantial hits to aggregate emerging market economy (EME) growth, but they had fairly muted effects on U.S.
growth.6 In part, this limited response in previous decades reflected the smaller share of the EMEs in the global economy and, as a related matter, in U.S.
Furthermore, the weight of EMEs in the global financial system was lighter in previous decades, so their crises were less disruptive to global markets.7 Finally, even back then, the safe-haven flows into dollar assets that I highlighted earlier were an important mitigating factor, pushing down U.S.
To be sure, the Russian default of August 1998, followed by the collapse of Long-Term Capital Management, had more-substantial effects on global markets and posed greater risk to the U.S.
economy, which triggered a policy response by the Fed in which the federal funds rate was cut 75 basis points between September and November of that year.8 Of note, after economic prospects appeared to stabilize, the Fed reversed those cuts in 1999.
In recent times, global shocks have also been consequential for U.S.
Examples include the 2011-13 euro-zone recession and the China devaluation and capital flight episode of 2015 and '16, when worries about a hard landing and renminbi depreciation, respectively, roiled world markets.
Both of these shocks originated in economies with large footprints in the global economy and financial system, and, as a result, they induced substantial disruptions in global financial markets.
As ever, these negative shocks were associated with safe-haven flows that pushed U.S.
Treasury yields down.9 Despite the drop in yields, overall financial conditions in the United States tightened, weighing on aggregate demand.10
Yet, in these episodes, accommodative policy responses in the United States helped ward off actual contractions of U.S.
During the 2011-13 euro-zone recession, the United States was already pursuing very accommodative policies in the wake of the Global Financial Crisis, but the timing of the maturity extension program and the third phase of U.S.
quantitative easing suggests they were helpful responses to the spillovers to the United States from this downturn.11 For the China episode of 2015 and '16, Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) statements from the time indicate that concerns about foreign developments and their effect on U.S.
financial conditions were a factor contributing to the delay in previously anticipated policy rate increases, thereby supporting the economy.
The message from these recent episodes is not just about the importance of timely policy adjustments by the central bank.
It is also about the importance of the enhanced resilience of financial institutions that has been achieved since the Global Financial Crisis.
and other financial markets are attuned to a number of prominent downside global risks, which include Brexit, a sharp slowdown in global growth prospects, and trade tensions.
Even though the Fed has been and is committed to a dual mandate to achieve maximum employment and price stability, in today's world, U.S.
policymakers can hardly ignore these risks, and three of our most recent FOMC statements have highlighted concerns about global economic and financial developments.
In addition, in our policy statements, as well as in other communications, we have indicated that, in the presence of these risks and with inflation pressures muted, we can afford to be patient and data dependent as we assess in future meetings what adjustments in our policy rate might be necessary to sustain growth, employment, and price stability in the U.S.
"The Recent Rise in Oil Prices (PDF)," Monetary Policy Report.
"The Effects of Foreign Shocks When Interest Rates Are at Zero (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 983.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.
Economy," interview by Christopher Alessi, Council on Foreign Relations, Washington, D.C., May 25.
"Moral Hazard and International Crisis Lending: A Test," IMF Working Paper WP/02/181.
Economy? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Southwest Economy, March/April, pp.
"The Causes and Consequences of China's Market Crash," Market Turmoil, Economist, April 24.
Monetary Policy: A Textual Analysis," Banque de France, Eco Notepad, September 25.
Industry: An Almost-Free Lunch? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of New York, FRBNY Economic Policy Review, vol.
"The Economic Effects of Energy Price Shocks," Journal of Economic Literature, vol.
"Global Economic Integration and Decoupling," speech delivered at the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Frankfurt, Germany, June 26.
"Asian Crisis Postmortem: Where Did the Money Go and Did the United States Benefit? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of New York, FRBNY Economic Policy Review, vol.
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants.
I am grateful to Shaghil Ahmed of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.
A recent exception is Ferrara and Teuf (2018), who construct an international environment indicator, based on a textual analysis of Federal Open Market Committee minutes, and examine the connection between this indicator and U.S.
Among others, Kohn (2008) documents the increase in recent decades of U.S.
trade links with the rest of the world, including through internationally integrated production as well as the increased financial linkages of the United States with the rest of the world.
An additional channel I have abstracted from here is that of commodity prices, which often move significantly in response to foreign factors.
Since the United States is both a large exporter of some commodities and a large importer of some other commodities, the overall implications for U.S.
In particular, the effects of oil prices on the U.S.
For example, Kilian (2008) and Kilian and Vigfusson (2017) present evidence on how increases in oil prices have historically adversely affected U.S.
economic performance, as the United States is a net importer of oil.
More recently, as outlined in Board of Governors (2018, pp.
16-17), with the net oil import share trending lower in the United States, the drag on U.S.
Most studies discussing contagion effects of the Mexican peso crisis focus on effects on other Latin American countries and do not highlight effects on U.S.
Studies on the effects of the Asian financial crisis on U.S.
Duca, Gould, and Taylor (1998) called the effect on the United States "more of a swell rather than a tsunami" (p.
One study, Pollard and Coughlin (1999), found significant negative effects of the Asian crisis on U.S.
Support provided by the official international financial community also helped mute global market disruptions during these EME crises.
Dell'Ariccia, Zettelmeyer, and Schnabel (2002) argue that the more-substantial response of global financial markets to the Russian default was because investors were expecting Russia to be rescued from having to default by the International Monetary Fund, and there was a global retreat from risk when that did not happen.
Media commentary from 2015 and 2016 is replete with descriptions of the rout in global financial markets resulting from financial turbulence in China.
In May 2012, I gave an interview at the Council on Foreign Relations highlighting the potential risks to the fragile U.S.
economic recovery posed by the euro-zone sovereign debt crisis; see Clarida (2012).
The quantitative easing was important, because the United States had already reduced the policy rate to zero and--as argued, for example, in Bodenstein, Erceg, and Guerrieri (2009)--the spillover effects of adverse foreign demand shocks to the U.S.
economy are significantly amplified at the zero lower bound for the policy rate in the absence of other expansionary policies.

Vice Chair for Supervision and Chair of the Financial Stability Board Randal K.
At the Joint Conference of the European Central Bank and the Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, Frankfurt, Germany
It is a pleasure to be here today at the European Central Bank in my capacity as chair of the Financial Stability Board (FSB) to help celebrate the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking's (JMCB) 50th anniversary.
As we dealt with the global financial crisis, the heads of state and government of the G20 tasked the FSB with identifying and addressing vulnerabilities in the global financial system and developing stronger regulatory and supervisory policies to create a more resilient global financial system in the pursuit of financial stability.
I am especially pleased to speak at this conference today because the FSB welcomes and encourages the participation of the academic community in tackling issues of global financial stability.
In our initiatives to examine the consequences of post-crisis reform, the academic community can help advance the field with analytical tools and critical insight.
The financial crisis exposed fault lines in the financial system that had to be addressed immediately, comprehensively, and vigorously.
The body of post-crisis regulation that resulted was founded on the work of academics, including important papers published in the JMCB, and involved the energy and efforts of many standard setters, regulators, supervisors, and central banks.
It was an exemplary feat of cooperation and coordination, and it has unquestionably made the financial system safer and more resilient.
Basel III is final, the largest global banks have substantially more capital and liquidity, over-the-counter derivatives markets are safer, and steps have been taken to address the risks of too-big-to-fail institutions.
Through greater monitoring and policy measures, the FSB is addressing risks from nonbank financial intermediation.
From within, FSB members have the occasion to reflect on how our work is executed--that is, we must ask ourselves how we can accomplish our mission more effectively, improving the financial sector's ability to support economic growth without threatening financial stability.
Outwardly, we will endeavor to reach out to a greater number of constituents and stakeholders for their input on the important financial stability issues they are encountering.
To start, we can strengthen the role of the six regional groups that are a part of the FSB organization.
The intent was to expand its outreach program beyond the membership in a systematic manner to better reflect the FSB's global mission.
Each group meets once or twice a year and helps the FSB obtain broader input into its policy development agenda.
These groups should be re-engineered to not only promote implementation of international policy initiatives within their respective regions, but also to be in a strong position to keep abreast of developments in financial markets and thus inform FSB policy.
Engagement outside of the FSB is also very important to our mission.
We currently engage with businesses, institutions, market participants, and academics on much of our FSB work.
For example, we have in the past conducted public consultations on FSB policy recommendations, albeit sometimes with very short timetables.
Beyond public consultation, we must convene more meetings with the private sector and academic community to build a more robust and meaningful dialogue.
For example, we kicked off the work we have undertaken at the behest of the Japanese G20 Presidency to study differences in regulatory environments and market conditions across jurisdictions that may have financial stability implications--often referred to as "market fragmentation"--by hosting a workshop with key stakeholders and academics.
In addition, we need to improve our interaction and cooperation with other standard-setting bodies, such as the Basel Committee, the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructure, the International Association of Insurance Supervisors, and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO).
While we have worked together in the past, we all owe it to the global community to seek out opportunities for improved cooperation and engagement.
To improve FSB transparency, we will be taking a number of important steps.
Over the term of my chairmanship, I will continue to look for steps that will allow all stakeholders to have a more open window into the FSB's decisionmaking process and products.
I'm reminded of Lord Hewart's famous--and oft-quoted--remark concerning the importance of jurisprudence to the public: "Not only must justice be done; it must also be seen to be done." We should be able to apply this concept to the field of global financial standard setting.
The second principle I would like to discuss concerns how we assess and mitigate vulnerabilities in the global financial system.
If we are not rigorously vigilant, we still risk another crisis.
What we need are forward-looking methodologies that use the most advanced analytical tools to spot vulnerabilities well in advance before they lead to widespread financial distress and economic costs.
Here the academic community can continue to contribute with cutting-edge and robust modeling techniques.
As such, the FSB's Standing Committee on Assessment of Vulnerabilities under the leadership of FSB Vice Chair Klaas Knot of the Dutch National Bank will be directing a considerable amount of energy to developing a cutting-edge framework for the identification and assessment of financial vulnerabilities.
It is important that a wide spectrum of financial participants be brought into the process, from banks and nonbank financial institutions to financial regulators to national authorities and multilateral standard-setting bodies and the broad academic community.
We can judge whether reforms are having their intended effects and making the financial system more resilient.
Are any regulatory reforms causing unintended, adverse effects? Can we achieve the same, strong level of financial resilience with reforms that are more efficient, simple, transparent, and tailored? The FSB must champion efficient and effective regulation in order to maintain public support for the progress we have made.
I will start with two relatively new issues that continue to evolve and grow in sophistication: nonbank financing and fintech, and then I will turn to the important work we are beginning on evaluating the effects of reforms aimed at ending too big to fail.
I will loosely define fintech as technology-enabled financial innovation that results in material changes to the provision of financial services.
Claims about fintech's promise abound: it has the power and potential to reduce economic inequality, increase financial inclusion, and boost economic growth.
We are already seeing significant changes to how many people around the world obtain financial services.
For example, in Kenya, a mobile payments technology has introduced mobile wallets to millions of people, many of whom never had a bank account.
In the United States, the largest mortgage provider is an online lender.
In China, a technology firm started the world's largest money market fund.
Yet, alongside this growth in fintech, as my predecessor as FSB chair emphasized, we as regulators must ensure that as we maximize the potential benefits in the development of fintech we minimize the potential risks and costs.
The FSB monitors and analyzes the financial stability implications of financial innovation as part of our mandate to identify and address vulnerabilities in the global financial system.
Let me outline two areas that we have started to examine in greater detail: the potential effects from the entry of large technology firms into financial services and the potential effects from the growth in decentralized financial technologies.
Over the last decade, the world has witnessed an explosion of large technology firms that are weaving themselves into our daily lives: for example, Facebook, Amazon, Apple, Tencent, and Baidu.
Some of these firms are increasingly providing some financial services, such as payments, credit, insurance, and asset management.
Looking at the technologies that underlie some of the recent innovative financial products, we see a move toward decentralization--that is, a movement toward technologies that connect financial market participants directly without an intermediary.
The potential areas of impact are broad: settling interbank payments; verifying and reconciling trade finance invoices; executing, enforcing and verifying the performance of contracts; and keeping an audit trail to deter money laundering.
Both the potential entry of large, established technology companies into financial services and the ability of technology to decentralize financial transactions raise a number of issues, some of which may touch on financial stability.
We continue to be responsible for ensuring that the financial system be sufficiently resilient that businesses and households worldwide need not fear the collapse of the system that serves their needs.
These are open questions that need to be addressed, and because they touch on issues of financial stability, the FSB is putting significant resources into understanding these potentially important developments.
To be clear, we are not trying to oppose innovation, because innovation, including fintech, offers the world many potential benefits.
Since the global financial crisis, nonbank financing has grown relatively rapidly, in both its absolute size and its relative importance in intermediating credit.
In the jurisdictions that the FSB closely monitors, nonbank financial assets are just under 50 percent of total global financial assets, a share that has grown by close to 5 percentage points since 2009.
Nonbank financial intermediation (the artist formerly known as "shadow banking") provides a valuable alternative to bank financing and helps to support real economic activity.
Accordingly, the shift within the financial system toward nonbank financing represents a welcome increase in the diversity of the sources of lending to both firms and households.
Even though the core of the financial system is much more resilient than before the global financial crisis, with strengthened bank capital and liquidity requirements, nonbank financing has been a source of systemic risk.
Nonbank financing often features high leverage, maturity and liquidity mismatches, opaque structures, and concentrated holdings of risky assets.
Nonbank financing can also lead to lower lending standards, bidding up the price of risky assets and sending an encouraging signal to credit underwriters.
All of these channels played a role in the recent global financial crisis.
More recently, new forms of interconnectedness between nonbank financial firms and the banking system have emerged that could, in some scenarios, act as channels for domestic and cross-border amplification of risks.
Given these potential risks, and the large--and increasing--role for nonbank financing, we need to monitor closely its development.
Is the growth of nonbank financing altering the existing market structures? Are there new vulnerabilities in the financial system? How will nonbank financing develop?
To answer these important questions, the FSB is progressing on three related tracks.
First, the FSB produces an annual report that outlines the developments in nonbank financing, detailing the global trends and potential risks.
Second, the FSB promotes the resilience of nonbanks through the development of a range of policies to address systemic vulnerabilities where they arise, while not impeding the growth of sustainable nonbank financing models.
The third issue that I would like to raise is the problem of "too big to fail"--that is, the perception by investors that some institutions will receive support from their governments if they become distressed.
This weakens market discipline and allows such firms to become even larger, more leveraged and more complex.
To address this challenge, the FSB and other global standard setters developed a framework and a set of policy measures intended to reduce the moral hazard risks posed by systemically important financial institutions.
These measures are intended to make the financial system more resilient, for example through higher capital and liquidity requirements, while simultaneously allowing these institutions to fail without causing disruption to critical services, such as payments.
A key element of the FSB's policy measures to address too big to fail is its total loss absorbing capacity standard.
Under this standard, the FSB introduced a bail-in (in contrast to a bailout) strategy that necessarily employs a gone concern or post-failure loss-absorbing and recapitalization capacity for the set of global systemically important banks.
Crucially, by raising resolution standards, we have improved the potential for non-disruptive bank failure.
The implementation of these standards is most advanced in the banking sector, especially for the largest globally important banks.
At the same time, we must be conscious that we have not actually tested the failure of a large bank in the marketplace--surely a good thing!
Standing over a decade on from the start of the financial crisis, we must ask ourselves, how effective have we been at reducing the problem of too big to fail? Have we achieved our objective to reduce or eliminate the problem? Have we introduced new unintended risks to the financial system or costs to other financial market participants?
To start answering these important questions, as part of its broader effort to evaluate the effects of reforms, the FSB is launching an evaluation of the effects of these too-big-to-fail reforms.
We intend to bring analytical rigor to these questions, and we recognize that the academic community has undertaken much work in this area.
Those principles include expanded engagement with a broad range of stakeholders and experts, rigorous and careful examination of financial vulnerabilities that may threaten our financial system, and analytical examination of past reforms to ensure that they are making the financial system as resilient as it can be in the most efficient manner possible.
Second, I shared some of the key questions we are working on relating to the rise of large technology firms in the financial sector and decentralized financial technologies, the growing importance of the nonbank financial sector, and our burgeoning efforts to look at how well we have addressed too big to fail, the signature issue of the recent financial crisis.
Moving forward there will surely be additional issues to address and areas to examine.a During my time as chair of the FSB, I hope to make progress not only on the areas I have outlined but on a range of forward-looking issues and continue to demonstrate the value of the FSB.
International standard-setting bodies serve an important role within our global financial sector, and I look forward to the FSB advancing our progress and work in these areas.

It is a great pleasure for me to join the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City in welcoming you to the Federal Reserve Board for the 2019 National Agricultural Credit Conference.
For nearly 80 years, these meetings have been at the forefront of important discussions for those with a stake in agricultural lending, with the first National Agricultural Credit meeting held in 1941.
Through all of these challenges, this conference has provided an important opportunity to promote a greater understanding of emerging issues in agricultural finance.
I am honored to welcome you to the first conference meeting to be held at the Federal Reserve Board.
Today and tomorrow, we will discuss recent developments in agricultural credit markets.
Census Bureau, 97 percent of the country's land mass is rural, and about 60 million Americans call a rural community their home.1 To put that number in perspective, the rural population of the United States is larger than the combined populations of the New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago metro areas.
If we were talking about the economies of those great cities, we'd stress their regional differences, the complexities of demographic change, and the distinct challenges each city faces to remain vibrant and innovative.
One in five people in rural areas have a bachelor's degree, compared to one in three in urban areas.4 This educational disparity helps explain why the employment-to-population and labor force participation rates in rural areas are lower than in many urban areas.5 Another contributing factor to low rural labor force participation is the opioid crisis, which the entire nation is struggling to overcome.
And while employment is growing more slowly in rural areas than in urban areas, rural unemployment has recovered and is now 1 percentage point below pre-recession levels.6 The rate of poverty in rural areas is also falling.
From a peak in 2013, the rural poverty rate has fallen 2 percentage points to 16.4 percent in 2017.
In manufacturing, innovation rates are similar for urban and rural manufacturers, although the services sector in rural areas lags its urban counterparts.7 And, I am greatly encouraged to see younger generations choosing to live in and return to their roots in rural communities, just as my family and I chose to do.
These younger generations are often seeking a rural lifestyle and a deeper connection to a smaller community‑‑a community where they can have a lasting impact.
Which brings us back to our focus today: agriculture is the foundation for many rural economies and it is the central topic for this conference.
Current conditions in agriculture appear to be stable, though at a low level of income, following sharp declines for several years from the peak in 2013.
As noted in the Federal Reserve's latest Financial Stability Report, farmland values are at exceptionally high levels, though down from their 2016 peak.
We also see above-trend yields are helping to support many operators, though working capital at many farms has fallen along with incomes.
Although the increase in problem loans associated with lower incomes has been modest, the Federal Reserve is monitoring the risk that has emerged in recent years.
One risk that we are actively monitoring is the recent and devastating flooding in the Midwest and its effect on both agriculture and rural communities across the region.
The topics you are discussing today are integral to my role as governor.
On Thursday, I will be visiting with and speaking to farmers and community bankers in Deming, New Mexico.
An important part of my job is to hear directly from leaders like you and others across this country to better understand current challenges facing your communities, your companies, and your industry.
My goal is to bring back the knowledge I gain from these discussions to inform and improve our work to support both the financial sector engaged in agricultural lending and our mission as the central bank of the United States.
I hope that conferences like this will help generate a richer discussion about the challenges and unique advantages in rural America so we can develop more creative, effective and direct policy responses.
Before I close, I want to thank you again, as well as the many people at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City and from the Federal Reserve Board who helped organize this year's conference.
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 2018 Broadband Deployment Report (Washington: FCC, February 2, 2018).
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Monetary Policy Report (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, February 22, 2019), 10–12.

The Community Reinvestment Act: How Can We Preserve What Works and Make it Better?
At the 2019 Just Economy Conference, National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, D.C.
It is a pleasure to have an opportunity to discuss how we can preserve what is working well with the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) and make it better.1 In recent months, we have seen a high level of engagement from banks and community organizations in discussions and comments about revising the CRA regulations, which serves as testament to the value of the CRA and provides valuable suggestions for improving our regulatory approach.
The one message that comes through most clearly is that the CRA is highly valued by bankers and community groups alike.
A second message is that the CRA could be even more effective in mobilizing community and economic development.
Before offering some thoughts on what we have learned and some possible ways forward, I want to begin by recalling why the CRA was established and what it was designed to achieve, as well as the important role it has played for over 40 years in low- and moderate-income communities across this country.
The CRA was one of several landmark pieces of legislation to address inequities in the credit markets in the wake of the civil rights movement.
The Fair Housing Act of 1968 and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act of 1974 addressed lending discrimination in mortgage and consumer credit based on race, sex, and other personal characteristics, while the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) of 1975 and later amendments recognized the importance of data in making these laws enforceable.
In 1977, Congress passed the CRA to address the credit needs of low- and moderate-income neighborhoods.
With the passage of the CRA, Congress aimed to reverse the urban disinvestment from years of government policies and market actions that deprived lower-income areas of credit by redlining--using red-inked lines to set apart neighborhoods that were deemed too risky.
By stipulating that banks have an affirmative and continuing obligation to meet the credit needs of all segments of the local communities they are chartered to serve, including low- and moderate-income communities, the CRA changed the way banks approach their lending and investment decisions in those communities.
More than 40 years later, the CRA continues to animate a vibrant community development ecosystem connecting community members with the banks that lend and invest, community organizations that deliver services and develop housing, and state and local governments that direct incentives and subsidies.
We participate actively through our community development and examination staff around the country, who help to connect stakeholders, analyze community needs, and assess outcomes.
The CRA, as amended in 1989, directs federal regulators to evaluate banks' records of helping to meet the credit needs of their local communities and assign one of four statutorily mandated ratings to their performance.2 Following additional amendments in 1991, the law requires that the agencies make public the banks' ratings and the analysis supporting them.
The public nature of CRA evaluations provides a strong incentive for good performance as well as a platform for public input on community needs.
This flexibility is valuable because it enables the agencies to revise the implementing regulations from time to time to keep the CRA relevant in response to technological innovation and other changes in the landscape for banking and community development financing.3
Last August, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) issued an Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (ANPR) to request comments on a variety of questions related to defining the areas in which regulators evaluate a bank's CRA performance, clarifying and expanding the types of activities that are eligible for CRA consideration, and establishing a metrics-based approach to rating a bank's CRA performance, among other things.
To augment this analysis, since October, the Federal Reserve System has held more than 25 outreach meetings across the country with banks and community organizations, including representation from the other banking agencies, culminating in an in-depth research symposium at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
Many commenters emphasize the importance of the CRA in supporting a vital community development ecosystem by bringing together banks, community organizations, state and local governments, educators, foundations, and other stakeholders to address community and economic development needs.
Many cautioned the banking agencies to proceed carefully so as not to disturb this important ecosystem.
I share this commitment to the CRA and to strengthening its role in community and economic development in the low- and moderate-income communities where it can make the greatest difference.
Banks and community organizations agree that the regulations should better reflect the way in which banking products and services are currently delivered.
Much has changed since the last major revision to the CRA regulations, which occurred at a time when physical branches were essential for all the deposit and lending needs of bank customers.
Since that time, technology and changing consumer preferences have led to banks gathering deposits and making loans well outside of their physical branches--for example, online and via mobile devices.
So it is fair to ask whether the CRA's current assessment area definition adequately reflects the community a bank serves today.
Clearly, it is time to better define the area in which the agencies evaluate a bank's CRA activities, but it is important to retain a focus on the credit needs of local communities.
As tempting as it may be to think that digital channels have rendered bank branches unnecessary, my discussions with banks and community stakeholders around the country have underscored the importance of branches as a venue for banks to engage with their communities.
While technology has much to offer by way of convenience and customer experience, it is often a complement to rather than a replacement for bank branches.
For this reason, and to be true to the original intent of the law, I believe that CRA evaluations should retain a focus on the credit needs of the local communities banks serve as indicated by their physical presence in those areas, but not be limited to where they have a physical presence.
Each quarter, I have been fortunate to make community visits around the country along with Board and Reserve Bank community development staff.
I have seen firsthand the success of the CRA in bringing banks to the table along with community organizations to address complex community needs.
Louis, I met with a community bank that was working with a place-based community development organization called Better Family Life to develop a micro-loan fund that is empowering low-income entrepreneurs.
In a visit to the Mississippi Delta in 2016, I heard from community members about having to drive long distances to deposit a check or access an ATM.
Bankers and other commenters have emphasized the high value that bank branches have for retail customers and small business owners in underserved communities, and research corroborates this.
Similar to banks, community organization commenters support updating the CRA regulations as they relate to a bank's assessment area.
They suggest retaining assessment areas around a bank's branches in order to retain the CRA's focus on local low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, while adding areas where banks conduct significant activity without branches.
Both bank and community organization commenters were open to having a larger area defined for the purposes of pursuing meaningful community development activities, particularly in cases where banks operate largely without branches.
By allowing for more activity in a broader geographic area, they argue that the artificial competition for investments in areas served by several banks (such as New York or Salt Lake City)--so-called credit hot spots--could be mitigated.
This could be to the benefit of credit deserts--those perennially underserved rural areas or small metropolitan areas that may not have a bank branch or, if they do, may not constitute a major market for purposes of banks' CRA evaluations.
In reflecting on these suggestions, we have been considering a possible approach that might rework the assessment area definition so that banks of a certain scale would have separate assessment areas for their retail activities and their community development activities.
This would retain the law's focus on the credit needs of a bank's local community by evaluating the retail lending and services it offers in the county or other geographic area surrounding its branches, deposit-taking ATMs, and other concentrations of lending and deposit-taking.4
As part of this approach, a bank would get CRA consideration for community development activities in a more expansive area.
Under the current rule, there is no ex ante certainty that a bank's community development activities will receive CRA consideration if they are in the broader statewide or regional area that includes the bank's assessment area.
This current approach has proven challenging in practice, as banks sometimes invest in a community development activity only to find that their examiner doesn't agree that the activity is located within the bank's assessment area.
Community development activities, in order to achieve an appropriate scale, often operate in larger areas that may not neatly overlap with a bank's assessment area.
A more expansive and ex ante clearer community development assessment area definition would afford CRA consideration for any such activity in a state where the bank has an assessment area.
This approach would help eliminate uncertainty and could encourage more capital for affordable housing, community facilities, and economic development activities in underserved areas.
Moreover, a broader assessment area for community development activities could help address the concentration of investment dollars in metropolitan areas where several banks may have branches, while other smaller metropolitan and rural areas remain chronically underserved.
My recent visit to the Pine Ridge Reservation in South Dakota brought home the importance of addressing the problem of credit hot spots and deserts that result from the CRA's current assessment area definition.
I met with the Thunder Valley Community Development Corporation and viewed their impressive 34-acre mixed-use project to create a new commercial center for the reservation.
When completed, it will include single-family and multifamily housing units, a boarding house for visitors, a community center, and a retail shopping area in a community where residents currently must drive an hour to reach a grocery store.
Although this is likely to be a very impactful investment, there is only one bank currently whose assessment area may extend to Pine Ridge.
In contrast, under the proposed community development assessment area approach, more of the banks with branches in Aberdeen, South Dakota, for instance, might be inclined to make such a community development loan with confidence it would get CRA consideration.
By creating separate assessment areas for retail and community development activities, we believe that banks would continue to place their community at the center of their retail lending and service activities while participating in meaningful community development opportunities that may have greater impact due to their broader reach.
In reflecting on the comments, listening sessions, and research conference, we have also been contemplating approaches to what community development activities count in order to provide greater predictability and better incentives.
Banks and community organizations have noted that the current structure of the large bank performance tests may actually hinder community development financing in a couple of ways.
First, under the existing approach, community development loans are considered in the lending test, while community development investments are considered in a separate test.
A number of banks and community organizations argue that the form of community financing may be influenced more by the structure of the CRA performance tests than by what makes the most sense for the project.
For example, if a bank is concerned about passing its lending test, it might structure financing as a loan rather than an investment to beef up its lending test performance even if an investment would be more effective.
Second, a number of banks and community organizations pressed the case for giving CRA consideration to any community development loan outstanding, rather than only those originated since the bank's last CRA evaluation.
Under the current rule, banks often make short-term, renewable community development loans simply to ensure that the incremental lending receives CRA consideration at each examination.
Banks and community organizations alike make a compelling argument that all types of community development finance, whether in the form of a loan or an investment, have greater impact when they serve as patient, reliable, committed sources of financing.
One possible approach to address these distortions and provide more effective incentives is to create a separate, comprehensive community development test to evaluate community development loans and qualified investments through a similar lens, possibly along with community development services.
A separate, comprehensive community development test could encourage banks to provide the patient, committed financing--in the form of loans as well as investments--that community development organizations value the most.
This is important because banks are uniquely situated to evaluate the community development finance projects in the states where they operate and to provide the smaller, more complex, and often more impactful, investments that don't attract institutional investors.
If banks cannot be confident ex ante that they will get the benefit of CRA consideration for these efforts, which may be time-consuming to evaluate and structure, it is not surprising they would instead gravitate toward activities they know will count.5
In addition to these broad changes to what and how community development activities should be counted, we recognize there are several definitional issues that merit consideration.
For example, many commenters advocated for an expansion of the definition of "community development" to include loans to or investments in community development financial institutions (CDFIs), regardless of the bank's assessment area, because the sole purpose of CDFIs is community development.
There are also suggestions that in high-poverty rural areas, where incomes overall may be low relative to federal benchmarks, it may be helpful to adjust the definition of what qualifies as low- and moderate-income so that more CRA activity receives consideration, which we will study.
Recognition of the variation in how banks deliver their products and services brings me to the third theme expressed by both banks and community organizations, which is the need for the CRA regulations to be flexible enough to evaluate banks of widely different sizes and business strategies.
Different perspectives were offered about some aspects of how to better tailor the regulations, particularly with regards to whether more banks should be considered "small" and, as such, eligible for a streamlined evaluation.
Indeed, one of the benefits of creating separate assessment area definitions and performance tests for retail activities and community development activities could be streamlining the tests and applying them in different ways to tailor CRA evaluations to banks based on their size and business strategy.
Small banks could have their lending and retail services evaluated under the retail test, while larger banks could be evaluated under both the retail and community development tests.
The assessment area definition could be flexible enough to allow banks that conduct most or all of their retail activity online to identify states in which they have a significant level of deposits, lending, or other banking activity in which they would have obligations under either the retail or community development test, as appropriate.
At the Federal Reserve, we agree that it is important for the banking agencies to take a consistent approach.
Moreover, HMDA data are collected from both banks and non-bank mortgage lenders.
Separately, the data collected under the CRA on community development loans are not adequate to support the analysis of a separate community development test, so it may be necessary to consider a better reporting system.
Collecting data and developing clear metrics will provide the improved clarity and ex ante predictability that banks seek.
We may also consider providing more baseline information that describes a bank's performance context, such as the demographic and economic information that helps to describe the credit needs and opportunities present in each assessment area.
In addition, there may be ways to more effectively incorporate community engagement into the process--for example, by having the banking agencies develop a joint community contacts database to facilitate access to information from local community stakeholders.
Overall, I have been impressed with the number of organizations that took the time to comment on the OCC's ANPR to and attend the Federal Reserve's outreach meetings.
It is encouraging to see the high level of commitment to the CRA from banks and community organizations alike.
As we think about the path forward, it is important that we retain the CRA's core focus on place while improving upon the regulation's flexibility in order to provide meaningful CRA evaluations of banks that largely deliver their products and services digitally.
We want whatever we design to be clear and more predictable for banks in order to promote more and more impactful CRA activity.
Taken together, changes to the CRA regulations' definition of assessment areas and performance test structure, along with improved metrics based on better data have the potential to enhance the regulations and better serve its purpose of encouraging banks to help meet the credit needs of low- and moderate-income communities.
We understand and appreciate that banks want to be able to make plans and manage their risks carefully through clearer standards regarding what counts, where it will be counted, and how.
If we can address these suggestions effectively, banks will be more effective in addressing the needs of their local communities and in some cases extend their activities to benefit chronically underserved communities.
I want to assure you that we will continue to engage with bank and community stakeholders to find a path forward that honors the purpose of the CRA by encouraging banks to attend to the credit needs of their local communities and to better address the needs of underserved areas.
This engagement will be vital as we join together with the other banking agencies to formulate regulatory changes that preserve what is best about CRA while ensuring its value and relevance for another generation.
I am grateful to Theresa Stark of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
The banking agencies are the Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
The current regulatory structure dates back to 1995 when the agencies reworked the regulations to provide for a variety of evaluation methods for banks of different sizes and business strategies and set out criteria by which a bank's lending, investment, and service activities in its community are evaluated.
The agencies could consider requiring assessment areas around a bank's other physical locations, such as loan production or trust offices, or in areas where the bank has significant deposit or lending activity.
We recognize that the agencies will need to give careful consideration to how to weight community development loans, investments, and services, so as not to harm the complex system of community development financing that is dependent largely on CRA-motivated investments.

At the "Just Economy Conference" sponsored by the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, Washington, D.C.
The National Community Reinvestment Coalition (NCRC) and its member organizations are at the forefront of an important conversation about how to ensure that low- and moderate-income communities are fairly served by the banking industry.
The work that you do to promote access to basic banking services, affordable housing, and entrepreneurship opportunities supports the Federal Reserve and other agencies that enforce fair lending laws.
The large number and variety of NCRC's local member organizations allow the NCRC to draw a detailed picture of how the Federal Reserve's policies affect lower-income communities, and we deeply appreciate the information that you share with us and the work that it represents.
As you know all too well, the current strength of the overall economy masks the struggles many individuals and families face in lower-income urban and rural communities.
Because home equity has been the main source of wealth among low- and moderate-income people, the crisis dealt a particularly severe blow to these households.
These aspirations are the basis upon which a strong economy is built.
That is why your work as NCRC member organizations offering financial counseling, homeownership education, and technical assistance for small businesses is as important as ever.
The Federal Reserve has an extensive community development function, related to our responsibilities under the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), that promotes partnerships between banks and community organizations to address local community and economic development needs.
As you know, the CRA requires federal banking regulators--the Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation--to encourage banks to help meet the credit needs of the communities they are chartered to serve, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods.
To complement the work we do with the other regulators to write regulations and guidance implementing CRA, the Federal Reserve System's community development staff help banks understand and meet their responsibilities under the law.
Fed staff members also act as liaisons between banks and community organizations to identify local community development needs and solutions.
But I do want to express my support for an interagency effort to revise the regulations to promote clarity and consistency in our evaluations of banks, particularly in light of the changes in the way bank products and services are delivered.
We value the CRA's role in meeting the credit needs of low- and moderate-income neighborhoods and want to be very careful that any revisions serve to strengthen the CRA's purpose.
I commend your dedication to ensuring that all Americans have fair access to the economic opportunities that our nation offers.
I hope you have a productive conference, and I look forward to our ongoing conversation about how the Federal Reserve can help.

At the 2019 SIEPR Economic Summit, Stanford Institute of Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California
Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, a place dedicated to scholarship supporting policies to better peoples' lives.
As today is International Women's Day, I would like to preface my remarks by commending the American Economic Association for highlighting the diversity challenges of the economics profession and charting a way forward.
Just over 10 years ago, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC, or the Committee) lowered the federal funds rate close to zero, which we refer to as the effective lower bound, or ELB.
The first was forward guidance, which is communication about the future path of interest rates.
Today I will explore some important features of normalization and then turn to what comes after.
As normalization moves into its later stages, my colleagues and I also believe that this is an important moment to take stock of issues raised by the remarkable experiences of the past decade.
We are therefore conducting a review of the Fed's monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices.
Between December 2008 and October 2014, the Federal Reserve purchased $3.7 trillion in longer-term Treasury and agency securities in order to support the economy both by easing dislocations in market functioning and by driving down longer-term interest rates.
Consistent with the Committee's long-stated intention, in October 2017 we started the process of balance sheet normalization.
To frame the discussion of the final stages of normalization of the size of the balance sheet, it is useful to consider what the phrase "normal balance sheet" meant in the decades before the crisis.
During that period, the main monetary policy decision for the FOMC was choosing a target value for the federal funds rate.
Subject to that choice, the Fed allowed the demand for its liabilities to determine the size of the balance sheet.
This is a feature of "normal" that we are returning to: After normalization, the size of the Fed's balance sheet will once again be driven by the demand for our liabilities.
To see what this means, consider figure 1, which shows the size of the Fed's balance sheet through time, as measured by total liabilities.
To understand these changes, it is useful to focus on a snapshot of the balance sheet at three points in time: before the crisis, when the balance sheet was at its largest, and a rough projection for the end of this year (table 1).
In 2006, the dominant liability was currency held by the public, and the dominant asset was Treasury securities.
The Fed's asset purchase programs increased the balance sheet from just below 6 percent to nearly 25 percent of GDP by the end of 2014.2 Balance sheets must balance, of course, and the Fed issued reserves as payment for the assets purchased.
The Committee has long said that the size of the balance sheet will be considered normalized when the balance sheet is once again at the smallest level consistent with conducting monetary policy efficiently and effectively.
Just how large that will be is uncertain, because we do not yet have a clear sense of the normal level of demand for our liabilities.
The normalized balance sheet may be smaller or larger than that estimate and will grow gradually over time as demand for currency rises with the economy.
In all plausible cases, the balance sheet will be considerably larger than before the crisis.
In this estimate, relative to before the crisis, the balance sheet will have grown as a share of GDP by about 10.6 percentage points.
Bank reserves account for the biggest part of the growth, or about 5.6 percent of GDP.
The crisis revealed that banks, especially the largest and most complex, faced much more liquidity risk than had previously been thought.
Because of both new liquidity regulations and improved management, banks now hold much higher levels of high-quality liquid assets than before the crisis.
Many banks choose to hold reserves as an important part of their strong liquidity positions.
And, third, other liabilities, which are mainly associated with the mechanics of the national and international financial system, will have grown by 1.1 percentage points.
As was the case before the crisis, the FOMC's chosen operating regime for controlling short-term interest rates also plays a role in determining the appropriate quantity of reserves.
In January, the Committee stated its intention to continue in our current regime in which our main policy rate, the federal funds rate or possibly some successor, is held within its target range by the interest rates we set on reserves and on the overnight reverse repo facility.3 In this system, active management of the supply of reserves is not required.
Thus, the supply of reserves must be "ample," in the sense of being sufficient to satisfy reserve demands even in the face of volatility in factors affecting the reserve market.4 Put another way, the quantity of reserves will equal the typical reserve demands of depositories plus a buffer to allow for reserve market fluctuations.
While the precise level of reserves that will prove ample is uncertain, standard projections, such as those in the table, suggest we could be near that level later this year.
As we feel our way cautiously to this goal, we will move transparently and predictably in order to minimize needless market disruption and risks to our dual-mandate objectives.
The Committee is now well along in our discussions of a plan to conclude balance sheet runoff later this year.
Once balance sheet runoff ends, we may, if appropriate, hold the size of the balance sheet constant for a time to allow reserves to very gradually decline to the desired level as other liabilities, such as currency, increase.
There is no real precedent for the balance sheet normalization process, and we have adapted our approach along the way.
In these final phases, we will adjust the details of our normalization plans if economic and financial conditions warrant.
After decisions regarding the size of the balance sheet have been made, we will turn to remaining issues, such as the ultimate maturity composition of the portfolio.
The Committee has long stated that it intends to return to a portfolio consisting primarily of Treasury securities.
The Committee has also been normalizing communication about our policy after a decade of forward guidance.
Since December 2008, the FOMC's postmeeting statement had contained ever-evolving forms of guidance about keeping the federal funds rate at the ELB or about the gradual pace at which that rate would return to more normal levels.
We removed the last elements of this crisis-era guidance in January.5 The federal funds rate is now within the broad range of estimates of the neutral rate--the interest rate that tends neither to stimulate nor to restrain the economy.
Committee participants generally agree that this policy stance is appropriate to promote our dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability.
Policy communication will not simply revert to the ways of the early 2000s, however, for transparency advances have continued apace since then.
The most significant change from the standpoint of forward guidance is that, since January 2012, the FOMC's quarterly Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) has included federal funds rate projections reaching up to three years into the future--often referred to as the "dot plot." Returning to a world of little or no explicit forward guidance in the FOMC's postmeeting statement presents a challenge, for the dot plot has, on occasion, been a source of confusion.
For example, in early 2014, the Committee's intentions were at odds with a common misreading of the dots, and Chair Yellen explained, "[O]ne should not look to the dot plot, so to speak, as the primary way in which the Committee wants to or is speaking about policy to the public at large.
My own view is that, if properly understood, the dot plot can be a constructive element of comprehensive policy communication.
Each participant's dots reflect that participant's view of the policy that would be appropriate in the scenario that he or she sees as most likely.
At other times, when uncertainty around the outlook is unusually high, I dutifully write down what I see as the appropriate funds rate path in the most likely scenario, but I do so aware that this projection may be easily misinterpreted, for what is "most likely" may not be particularly likely.
Further, at times downside risks may deserve significant weight in policy deliberations.
In short, as Chairman Bernanke explained, the SEP projections are merely "inputs" to policy that do not convey "the risks, the uncertainties, all the things that inform our collective judgment."7
Effectively conveying our views about risks and their role in policy projections can be challenging at times, and we are always looking for ways to improve our communications.
I have asked the communications subcommittee of the FOMC to explore ways in which we can more effectively communicate about the role of the rate projections.
Delivering on the FOMC's intention to ultimately normalize policy continues to be a major priority at the Fed.
We live in a time of intense scrutiny and declining trust in public institutions around the world.
Our monetary policy independence allows us to serve the public without regard to short-term political considerations, which, as history has shown, is critical for sound monetary policymaking.
Among other initiatives, my colleagues and I on the FOMC are undertaking a year-long review of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices.
While this is the first time the Fed has opened itself up in this way, many central banks around the world have conducted similar reviews, and our approach builds on their experiences.
We believe that our existing framework for conducting monetary policy has generally served the public well, and the review may or may not produce major changes.
Consistent with the experience of other central banks with these reviews, the process is more likely to produce evolution rather than revolution.
We seek no changes in law and we are not considering fundamental changes in the structure of the Fed, or in the 2 percent inflation objective.
While there is a high bar for adopting fundamental change, it simply seems like good institutional practice to engage broadly with the public as part of a comprehensive approach to enhanced transparency and accountability.
Without ruling out other topics, we have highlighted three questions that seem particularly important at present (figure 4):
Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective?
Are the existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded?
How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?
Because interest rates around the world have steadily declined for several decades, rates in normal times now tend to be much closer to zero than in the past (figure 5).8 Thus, when a recession comes, the Fed is likely to have less capacity to cut interest rates to stimulate the economy than in the past, suggesting that trips to the ELB may be more frequent.
The post-crisis period has seen many economies around the world stuck for an extended period at the ELB, with slow growth and inflation well below target.
Persistently weak inflation could lead inflation expectations to drift downward, which would imply still lower interest rates, leaving even less room for central banks to cut interest rates to support the economy during a downturn.
It is therefore very important for central banks to find more effective ways to battle the low-inflation syndrome that seems to accompany proximity to the ELB.
In the late 1990s, motivated by the Japanese experience with deflation and sluggish economic performance, economists began developing the argument that a central bank might substantially reduce the economic costs of ELB spells by adopting a makeup strategy.9 The simplest version goes like this: If a spell with interest rates near the ELB leads to a persistent shortfall of inflation relative to the central bank's goal, once the ELB spell ends, the central bank would deliberately make up for the lost inflation by stimulating the economy and temporarily pushing inflation modestly above the target.
This can substantially reduce the economic costs of ELB spells.10 Researchers have suggested many variations on makeup strategies.11 For example, the central bank could target average inflation over time, implying that misses on either side of the target would be offset.
By the time of the crisis, there was a well-established body of model-based research suggesting that some kind of makeup policy could be beneficial.12 In light of this research, one might ask why the Fed and other major central banks chose not to pursue such a policy.13 The answer lies in the uncertain distance between models and reality.
In models, confidence in the policy is merely an assumption.
In practice, when policymakers considered these policies in the wake of the crisis, they had major questions about whether a central bank's promise of good times to come would have moved the hearts, minds, and pocketbooks of the public.
Part of the problem is that when the time comes to deliver the inflationary stimulus, that policy is likely to be unpopular--what is known as the time consistency problem in economics.14
Experience in the United States and around the world suggests that more frequent ELB episodes could prove quite costly in the future.
My FOMC colleagues and I believe that we have a responsibility to the American people to consider policies that might promote significantly better economic outcomes.
Tonight I have focused on policy normalization and our efforts to engage the public in what may come after.
Right now, most measures of the health and strength of the labor market look as favorable as they have in many decades.
Inflation will probably run a bit below our objective for a time due to declines in energy prices, but those effects are likely to prove transitory.
Core inflation, which is often a reliable indicator of where inflation is headed over time, is quite close to 2 percent.
With nothing in the outlook demanding an immediate policy response and particularly given muted inflation pressures, the Committee has adopted a patient, wait-and-see approach to considering any alteration in the stance of policy.
Considering monetary policy more broadly, we are inviting thorough public scrutiny and are hoping to foster conversation regarding how the Fed can best exercise the precious monetary policy independence we have been granted.
Our goal is to enhance the public's trust in the Federal Reserve--our most valuable asset.
"New Framework for Strengthening Monetary Easing: 'Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing with Yield Curve Control' (PDF)," announcement, September 21.
"Monetary Policy in a New Era," paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute of International Economics, Washington, October 12-13.
"Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February.
"The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy (PDF)," ECB Occasional Paper Series No.
"The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no.
"The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions," IMF Economic Review, vol.
"From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," Journal of International Economics, vol.
Roberts (2017), "Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 19887.
Monetary Policy Frameworks and the Effective Lower Bound on Interest Rates (PDF), Staff Report 877.
"Average Inflation Targeting," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay?" International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
Williams (2000), "Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low Inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Real Implications of the Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
The balance sheet had been steady at around 5 percent of GDP since about 1980, as currency slowly grew as a share of GDP, but the increase was offset by a decline in reserves.
This size is similar to that of the balance sheet relative to GDP in the wake of the Great Depression.
As noted in the minutes of the November 2018 FOMC meeting (see https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20181108.htm), participants discussed costs and benefits of various alternatives to the federal funds rate, such as the overnight bank funding rate, and recommended further study of the issue.
This type of guidance was used at times before the crisis and may play a role in the future.
It is not, however, the explicit guidance about the medium-term level or direction of rates that distinguished the crisis-era guidance.
Note that the SEP does provide some general information about the balance of risks, but this information is far less complete than the detail provided on the modal outlook.
For evidence on the secular decline in interest rates in the United States and abroad, see King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).
Eggertsson and Woodford (2003), for example, show that optimal policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during subsequent economic expansions.
The strategy in Reifschneider and Williams (2000), for instance, involves a central bank following a Taylor rule modified to make up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes.
Kiley and Roberts (2017) study a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during normal times to compensate for below-target inflation during ELB episodes.
See also Bernanke (2017) for a strategy in which low inflation is made up if it occurs when the federal funds rate is at or near the ELB.
The Bank of Japan (2016) came closest, announcing in September 2016 an "inflation-overshooting commitment" (p.
Transcripts of FOMC discussions (see, for example, 2011 transcripts, available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomchistorical2011.htm) reveal that some policymakers were dubious about whether it would be appropriate or even feasible for a current FOMC to bind a future FOMC to a policy that it might find objectionable, which contributed to more general doubts over whether the policy would be credible.

At the Julis-Rabinowitz Center for Public Policy and Finance and the Bendheim Center for Finance, Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
While our economy continues to add jobs at a solid pace, demand appears to have softened against a backdrop of greater downside risks.
Prudence counsels a period of watchful waiting--especially with no signs that inflation is picking up.
With balance sheet normalization now well advanced, it will be appropriate to wind down asset redemptions later in the year.1
Both the modal outlook and the risks around it have important implications for monetary policy, but in somewhat different ways.
While the economy performed very well last year, I have revised down my modal outlook for this year, in part reflecting some softening in the recent spending and sentiment data.
In the initial estimate released last week, real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at a 2.6 percent annual rate in the fourth quarter of 2018.
Although the magnitude of the drop may be revised smaller, coming in the last month of the quarter, that decline suggests that growth in consumer spending may be held down in the first quarter of this year.
Residential construction data have been soft for some time, reflecting in part earlier increases in interest rates, and homebuilders report that supply constraints on available lots, shortages of skilled workers, and tariffs on inputs are also contributing to the slowdown.
The latest data on capital goods orders, for example, suggest some softening in equipment spending gains.
The weaker foreign outlook also acts as a crosscurrent to the modal outlook.
While strong foreign growth provided tailwinds early last year, foreign growth projections have been revised down repeatedly more recently.2 The slowdown of foreign growth now appears to be more persistent than initially assumed, with growth likely running below potential for most of last year.
Economic activity slowed noticeably in the second half of 2018 in China, where policymakers have been trying to achieve a balance between restraining very elevated levels of domestic debt, on the one hand, and maintaining strong aggregate growth, on the other.
The protracted trade conflict with the United States has further complicated that challenge.
Global weakness in trade and manufacturing has also weighed on Japan.
The slowdown in foreign demand spills over into the United States through a variety of channels.
Although the dollar has weakened somewhat lately, its earlier appreciation and slowing foreign growth contributed to a decline in exports and a fall in import prices over the second half of last year.
In contrast, the recent step-down in long-term rates and easing in the dollar have lessened pressures on yields in emerging markets and provided more policy space in some cases.
In the United States, financial markets saw substantial volatility late last year, which may still be affecting sentiment.
From September to December of last year, financial conditions tightened considerably, with the stock market falling as much as 20 percent, and corporate bond premiums rising.
This year, much of that tightening has reversed: The S&P 500 has made up more than half of its earlier losses, and corporate risk spreads have reversed much of their earlier tightening.
Let me turn now to the second category of crosscurrents facing the U.S.
Policy uncertainty has been elevated recently and has been cited as an important factor in the financial volatility late last year.
The tariffs and trade disruptions that have occurred so far are estimated to have had relatively modest effects on aggregate growth and inflation, although damaging disruptions have been concentrated in some sectors, such as soybeans.
While recent reports suggest some progress, the prospect of additional tariffs in the trade conflict with China or on automobiles have been cited frequently as a risk in earnings reports and reports from business contacts.
The Bipartisan Budget Act, which is estimated to boost GDP growth by 0.3 percentage point, on average, per year in 2018 and 2019, is scheduled to expire in 2020.
Most immediately, a "no-deal Brexit" would have adverse consequences for Britain, and potentially more broadly, given London's role as a financial center.
Job gains have averaged 240,000 per month over the past three months--more than twice the pace necessary to absorb new entrants into the labor force.
The January unemployment rate of 4 percent is near a multidecade low.
The strong labor market has drawn many Americans into productive work, and the overall employment-to-population ratio for workers between the ages of 25 and 54 is now within 1/2 percentage point of its pre-crisis peak.
Many of the main measures of wages have been increasing at rates not seen on a sustained basis in almost 10 years, although labor's share of overall income remains stubbornly depressed.3 Nonetheless, recent data on claims have shown some softening, and I will be watching a broad set of labor market indicators carefully, including the payrolls data for February, which will be released tomorrow.
Just as the economy is performing well on the maximum-employment goal set by the Congress, it is also close to meeting our price-stability mandate.
Following many years of low readings, the core price index for consumer purchases for the 12 months through December was up 1.9 percent.4 That reading lines up with the median Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) forecast from a year ago.
So inflation is very close to the Committee's 2 percent objective and its earlier expectation.
Even so, we will need to be vigilant to ensure inflation achieves 2 percent on a sustained basis.
As I have observed for some time, underlying trend inflation may be running slightly below the Committee's 2 percent objective.
Many statistical filtering models put underlying inflation modestly below 2 percent, and some survey measures of inflation expectations are running somewhat below pre-crisis levels.
Similarly, the difference between the yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities is lower than it was before the crisis, and that difference may provide some insight into market participants' views of underlying inflation.5
The fact that estimates of underlying trend inflation remain a bit on the soft side reinforces the evidence that the Phillips curve is very flat, a key element of the post-crisis new normal that I have noted previously.6 The responsiveness of price inflation to resource utilization at the national level has been very weak for some time.
This raises the possibility that the economy may have room to run.
As the unemployment rate has fallen to levels not seen in many decades, we have heard concerns that the steeper Phillips curve of the past might reassert itself, perhaps in a nonlinear manner.7 But all available evidence suggests inflation expectations remain well anchored to the upside.
Indeed, the contours of today's new normal suggest we should be equally attentive to a risk of erosion in inflation expectations to the downside.
A range of evidence suggests that the long-run "neutral" rate of interest--the rate of interest consistent with the economy growing at its potential rate and stable inflation--is very low relative to its historical levels.
The low long-run neutral rate limits the amount of space available for cutting the federal funds rate to buffer the economy from adverse developments and is likely to increase the frequency or length of periods when the policy rate is pinned at the lower bound.
In turn, more frequent or extended episodes when inflation is below target and policy is at the effective lower bound risk pulling down private-sector inflation expectations in a self-reinforcing downward spiral, which could further compress the monetary policy buffer to cushion downside shocks.8
The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has made clear that the 2 percent inflation goal is symmetric.9 As the median SEP forecasts have indicated, a number of Committee members have previously projected a policy path consistent with inflation rising somewhat above 2 percent for a time, which is in line with the symmetry of the target.
There is a separate discussion of policies that would pre-commit to make up for past misses on inflation, such as temporary price-level targeting, which may be important in circumstances with a low long-run neutral rate and more frequent effective-lower-bound episodes.10 I expect this will be part of our review of monetary policy strategies, tools, and communication practices later this year.11
Our policy goal now is to preserve the progress we have made on maximum employment and target inflation.
It is heartening to see so many American workers coming back into the jobs market with rising wages.
With regard to policy, modest downward revisions to the baseline outlook for output and employment would call for modest downward revisions to the path for our conventional policy tool, the federal funds rate, helping to offset some of the weakness that would otherwise weigh on the economy.
Moreover, basic principles of risk management would suggest that the increase in downside risks warrants a modest downward revision to the modal path for policy.
These downside risks, if realized, could weigh on economic activity.12 So heightened downside risks to output and employment would argue for a softer federal funds rate path even if the modal outlook for the economy were unchanged.
At a time when the modal outlook appears to have softened a bit, and risks appear more weighted to the downside than the upside, the best way to safeguard the gains we have made on jobs and inflation is to navigate cautiously on rates.
Risk management in an environment of a low long-run neutral rate and an attenuated relationship between resource utilization and overall inflation supports this approach.
Watchful waiting will allow us to gather more information about domestic momentum and foreign growth as well as some of the policy risks weighing on sentiment.
Let me turn now to the second tool used by the Federal Reserve in recent years--asset purchases.
Recall that, after reducing the federal funds rate to its effective lower bound of zero in the 2008-09 recession, the FOMC sought a mechanism for providing additional stimulus in order to achieve maximum employment and target inflation.13 The Federal Reserve purchased longer-term Treasury securities in an effort to push down longer-term interest rates to support economic activity, an approach sometimes referred to as quantitative easing.
It also purchased agency mortgage-backed securities for the same reason, as well as to provide support to the housing sector, which was at the heart of the crisis.
Although the empirical estimates vary, most conclude that the asset purchase programs were successful in supporting the recovery.14
Once recoveries become well established, the Federal Reserve moves its policy settings to more normal levels.
Our current extended recovery is no exception: The Federal Reserve first started moving the federal funds rate to more normal values once the expansion was well established, and then it started normalizing the balance sheet once normalization of the federal funds rate was well under way.
currency has grown notably relative to nominal GDP, the Treasury Department now holds large balances in its account at the Fed as an important part of its cash management, and foreign central banks hold larger deposits than in the past.
In addition, the demand from commercial banks for deposits at the Fed--that is, "reserves"--appears to have increased substantially.
Spurred by new liquidity regulations and their own internal liquidity management practices, the largest banks hold substantial amounts of so-called high-quality liquid assets to protect against the risk of a sudden "run" on their uninsured short-run liabilities, as occurred during the financial crisis.
So it appears that the new normal size of the balance sheet is likely to remain greater relative to the size of the economy than it was before the financial crisis.
For the past decade, the Federal Reserve has operated a regime with reserves that are very abundant relative to banks' demand for reserves.
The current framework relies on the Federal Reserve's interest rate on reserves to control the federal funds rate, in the context of the provision of ample reserves.
In contrast, the pre-crisis framework featured a scarce supply of reserves, which the Federal Reserve would vary on a daily basis to control the federal funds rate by closely matching the demand for reserves.
The FOMC recently affirmed that it would continue to operate the current framework.15 This approach makes sense for a variety of reasons.
The current framework has been effective in providing good control of the policy rate and ensuring effective transmission to other money markets and the financial system.
Accommodating those swings with scarce reserves would require much larger daily open market operations than was the case before the crisis.
By remaining in a regime with ample reserves, the Fed is able to control short-term interest rates without the need to conduct daily open market operations.
Because there are ample reserves, the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates are determined along the flat portion of the reserve demand curve.
As a result, the system can absorb swings in the demand and supply of reserves with limited need for open market operations.
Given that the Committee is now operating with two instruments, it is important to note that the Committee clarified that it would seek to use only one tool actively at a time, and that the preferred active tool would be the federal funds rate when it is above the effective lower bound.
For instance, we would not want the balance sheet to be shrinking at a time when the FOMC thought it was appropriate to cut the federal funds rate.
After holding the size of the balance sheet roughly flat since mid-2014, once the normalization of the federal funds rate was deemed well under way in October 2017, the Committee started to allow the size of the balance sheet to shrink in line with the pledge to "hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively."16 We have made substantial progress, as demonstrated by the level of reserves.
In my view, asset redemptions should come to an end later in the year, which would provide a sufficient buffer of reserves to meet demand and avoid volatility.
We have gathered information from market contacts and have surveyed banks to assess their demand for reserves.17 I would want to see a healthy cushion on top of that to avoid unnecessary volatility and ensure that the federal funds rate will be largely insulated from daily swings in factors affecting reserves.
With regard to the composition of the balance sheet, I favor moving eventually to a portfolio of only Treasury securities--that is, without any agency mortgage-backed securities remaining.
It is important to do so in a way that continues to avoid market disruptions.
That shift will be under way naturally, albeit slowly, as these securities mature and are replaced by Treasury securities.18
For the portion of our portfolio in Treasury securities, the Federal Reserve currently holds no Treasury bills, and our portfolio has a much longer weighted-average maturity than the current stock of Treasury securities outstanding in the market or than our pre-crisis portfolio, which was more heavily weighted toward short-dated securities than the holdings of the public.
When the Federal Reserve System begins once again purchasing Treasury securities, we will need to decide what maturities to purchase.
Given how far out of step the System's current portfolio is from common benchmarks, however, it might make sense to weight those purchases more heavily toward Treasury bills and other shorter-dated Treasury securities for a time.
Further into the future, there may be good reasons to shift toward greater holdings of shorter-term securities to provide greater flexibility.
The most likely path for the economy appears to have softened against a backdrop of greater downside risks.
Our goal now is to safeguard the progress we have made on full employment and target inflation.
And with balance sheet normalization now well advanced, it will soon be time to wind down our asset redemptions.
What Else Can Central Banks Do? (PDF) Geneva Reports on the World Economy 18.
Geneva and London: International Center for Monetary and Banking Studies and Centre for Economic Policy Research.
"Monetary Policy in a New Era (PDF)," paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 12-13.
"Monetary Policy Strategies for a Low-Rate Environment (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-009.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February.
"Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, September 17.
"FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, June 14.
"Federal Open Market Committee Reaffirms Its 'Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,' " press release, January 30.
"Review of Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communications," webpage, Board of Governors.
"Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization," press release, January 30.
"Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the 57th National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Washington, October 12.
"The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, September 12.
"Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5.
"Navigating Monetary Policy as Headwinds Shift to Tailwinds," speech delivered at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, March 6.
"Prospects for Inflation in a High Pressure Economy: Is the Phillips Curve Dead or Is It Just Hibernating?" paper presented at the U.S.
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"OECD Sees Global Growth Slowing, as Europe Weakens and Risks Persist," press release, March 6.
I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
See International Monetary Fund (2019) and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2019).
For the share of overall income going to workers, see, for instance, data on the labor share in the nonfarm business sector--available from the FRED database on the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
I focus on the core measure because food and energy prices are volatile, and total inflation has generally fluctuated around core inflation.
This risk is reinforced by the pro-cyclicality of fiscal policy over the past five years and the erosion of fiscal space.
The limited amount of conventional policy space reinforces the importance of guarding against the materialization of downside risks.
Some foreign central banks have reduced their short-term policy rates below zero.
As described in Board of Governors (2017), the reduction in reinvestment was implemented through a series of gradually rising caps on repayments of principal.
Quoted text is from the penultimate bullet point in Board of Governors (2014).
The Senior Financial Officer Survey, which was undertaken in September 2018 and is being undertaken again, gathered views systematically from a number of banks concerning their reserve balance management strategies and practices.
The survey is available on the Federal Reserve Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/data/sfos/sfos-release-dates.htm.
The Committee has indicated it may choose to sell agency mortgage-backed securities at some point to help accomplish the Treasury-securities-only goal.
In this eventuality, there would be considerable advance notice, with an aim to minimizing any market disruptions.

Tonight I will start with the near-term outlook for the U.S.
So, tonight, after a brief review of the here and now, I will focus on an issue that is likely to be of more lasting importance: the need for policies that will support and encourage participation in the labor force, promote longer-term growth in our rapidly evolving economy, and spread the benefits of prosperity as widely as possible.
Beginning with the here and now, Congress has charged the Federal Reserve with achieving maximum employment and stable prices, two objectives that together are called the dual mandate.
I am pleased to say that, judged against these goals, the economy is in a good place.
The current economic expansion has been under way for almost 10 years.
This long period of growth has pushed the unemployment rate down near historic lows (figure 1).
The employment gains have been broad based across all racial and ethnic groups and all levels of educational attainment as well as among the disabled (figure 2).1 And while the unemployment rate for African Americans and Hispanics remains above the rates for whites and Asians, the disparities have narrowed appreciably as the economic expansion has continued.
Nearly all job market indicators are better than a few years ago, and many are at their most favorable levels in decades.
It is especially encouraging that the labor force participation rate of people in their prime working years, ages 25 to 54, has been rising for the past three years.
Rising productivity allows wages to increase without adding to inflation pressures.
Sustained productivity growth is a necessary ingredient for longer-run improvements in living standards.
The price stability side of our mandate is also in a good place.
After remaining below our target for several years, inflation by our preferred measure averaged roughly 2 percent last year (figure 4).
Inflation has softened a bit since then, largely reflecting the recent drop in oil prices.
Futures markets and other indicators suggest that oil prices are unlikely to fall further, and if this proves correct, oil's drag on overall inflation will subside.
Consistent with that view, core inflation, which excludes volatile food and energy prices and often provides a better signal of where inflation is heading, is currently running just a touch below our 2 percent objective.
Signs of upward pressure on inflation appear muted despite the strong labor market.
While the data I have discussed so far give a favorable picture of the economy, it is also important to acknowledge that not everyone has shared in the benefits of the expansion to the same extent, and that too many households still struggle to make ends meet.2 In addition, over the past few months we have seen some crosscurrents and conflicting signals about the near-term outlook.
For instance, growth has slowed in some major economies, particularly China and Europe.
Uncertainty is elevated around some unresolved government policy issues, including Brexit and ongoing trade negotiations.
While most of the incoming domestic economic data have been solid, some surveys of business and consumer sentiment have moved lower.
Given the positive outlook but also muted inflation pressures and the crosscurrents I just mentioned, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) will be patient as we determine what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to support our dual-mandate objectives.
This common-sense risk-management approach has served the Committee well in the past.
I will turn now from the near-term outlook to the question of how the economy will perform over the long haul.
From 1991 through 2007, the economy expanded annually at about 3 percent, similar to the pace for much of second half of the 20th century.
If the earlier 3 percent growth had persisted over the past 12 years, incomes today would be almost 20 percent higher than they now are.
From the standpoint of future Americans, if the slower growth persists for a half-century, incomes will end up roughly half of what they would have been.
Why has growth slowed, and what can we do about it? To understand the causes of the slowdown, it is useful to divide growth into two components: (1) growth in the cumulative number of hours of worked by all workers and (2) growth in the amount of output derived, on average, from each hour of work.
We refer to output per hour of work as "labor productivity." From 1991 through 2007, when the economy expanded at a 3 percent average rate, hours worked increased about 1 percent a year and economy-wide productivity grew about 2 percent (figure 5).3 Since 2007, both of these growth factors have slowed by about half, with hours worked annually increasing only 0.5 percent from 2008 to 2018 and productivity rising just 1 percent on average.4
Growth in hours worked has slowed, in part, because of slower U.S.
Demographic factors are generally slow moving and predictable, and there is no surprise in the fact that slower population growth and the retirement of the baby boomers are now contributing to slower growth in the total amount of work performed in the economy.
There is another factor contributing to the slower growth in hours, however, and this factor is more surprising and more troubling.
To be counted as "in the labor force," a person must either be employed or have looked for work within the past four weeks.
The share of people of working age who are actually in the labor force has fallen significantly since the late 1990s.
This decline raises the important question of why have people of working age increasingly chosen not to work.
For example, among those aged 16 to 24, participation in the labor market has fallen from about 65 percent in the 1990s to 55 percent now (figure 6).
The fraction of this age group who are neither in school nor in the labor force has held fairly constant at around 11 percent, and measures of school enrollment are up.5 Higher educational attainment is much more important in today's job market than in the past, and investing in education today has long-term benefits for both the student and for society.6 Statistics confirm that higher educational attainment is associated with higher labor force participation, lower unemployment, and higher wages.
But the decline in the United States has been much larger than most, and U.S.
As a result, the United States now has the fourth lowest participation rate among 34 advanced economies.
In the mid-1990s, the United States ranked in the upper tier for prime-age women's participation, but since then participation by women has advanced rapidly in many countries while it has declined slightly in the United States.
Now the United States is sixth lowest among these 34 countries.
This pattern is consistent with the idea that a modern economy demands ever-higher skills, and that workers without those skills are being left behind (figure 9).
But the international experience suggests that this outcome is not inevitable: The drop in participation among those with less education is much smaller in some comparable countries than in the United States.7
The research into labor force participation in the United States and across the world does not find a magic fix, but it does suggest a variety of policies that might better prepare people for the modern workforce as well as support and reward labor force participation.8 I should note that the Fed has neither the tools nor the mandate to directly address the forces that are holding back labor force participation.
We can contribute by fostering a strong labor market, in accordance with our mandate.
While it is not the Fed's role to advocate particular labor force policies, I do want to put a spotlight on this important issue.
I strongly believe policies that bring prime-age workers into productive employment, particularly those who may have been left behind because of low skills or educational attainment, could bring great benefits both to those workers and to our economy.
The second factor accounting for the slowdown in GDP growth is the slower pace of labor productivity growth, or output per hour worked.
When measured annually, labor productivity growth is volatile, but focusing on five-year averages, we can see that from 1975 through 2007, productivity growth averaged about 2 percent while fluctuating between about 1 and 4 percent (figure 10).
Since then, growth seems to have settled at the low end of that historical range.
Unlike the situation with labor force participation, the slowdown in productivity growth is also evident in most advanced economies, and the U.S.
There is an ongoing debate over the causes and implications of this global slowdown in productivity growth.
Some argue that the rapid growth seen over much of the 20th century was historically anomalous, and that we are destined to return to the slower growth of centuries past.
Many have noted that during the current expansion, investment and capital accumulation have been lower than in previous expansions, so perhaps we just need to invest more.
While we have had slower capital accumulation of late, we have also had slower growth in labor supply--hours worked.
Thus, capital per worker, according to some analysis, has continued to increase roughly at its pre-recession trend.
The more optimistic analysts argue that we may be in a productivity lull while businesses work to realize the full benefit of advances that are embedded in recent investment.10 Others suggest that productivity-advancing ideas are inherently harder to find and exploit than in the past, implying that slower productivity growth may be with us for the long haul.11 This debate is unlikely to be resolved anytime soon.
Indeed, the recent tax reforms were designed in part to boost capital investment and thus productivity.
Because these policies are not the province of the Fed, I will not advocate for particular approaches.
Instead, I will just observe that researchers and policy analysts have proposed many promising ideas that may be capable of attracting wide support.
Policies that succeed in enhancing productivity growth would greatly benefit future generations of Americans.
To conclude, the United States is currently in the midst of one of the longest economic expansions in our history.
Unemployment is low and inflation is close to our 2 percent objective.
My colleagues and I on the FOMC are focused on using our monetary policy tools to sustain those favorable conditions.
Tonight I have also highlighted some longer-term challenges we face, including low labor force participation by prime-age workers and low productivity growth.
The nation would benefit greatly from a search for policies with broad appeal that could promote labor force participation and higher productivity, with benefits shared broadly across the nation.
The unemployment rate of those with a disability and between the ages of 16 and 64 fell from more than 16 percent in 2011 to less than 9 percent in 2018.
Meanwhile, their labor force participation rate has been rising over the past few years.
In 2018, about 8 percent of the population aged 16 to 64 reported themselves as having a disability, and their labor force participation rate was 33 percent.
For example, a Federal Reserve survey indicates that in early 2018, after nearly a decade of growth, as many as 40 percent of households were unprepared for an emergency expense of as little as $400.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S.
These estimates are based on the Congressional Budget Office's (2019) estimates for potential GDP for the Budget and Economic Outlook: 2019 to 2029 (Washington: CBO, January).
Canon, Marianna Kudlyak, and Yang Liu (2015), "Youth Labor Force Participation Continues to Fall, but It Might Be for a Good Reason," Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Pedtke, Nicolas Petrosky-Nadeau, and Annemarie Schweinert (2018), "Why Aren't U.S.
Workers Working?" Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, FRBSF Economic Letter 2018-24 (San Francisco: FRB San Francisco, November 13).
Francesco Grigoli, Zsóka Kóczán, and Petia Topalova (2018), "Labor Force Participation in Advanced Economies: Drivers and Prospects (PDF)," chapter 2 in International Monetary Fund, World Economic Outlook (Washington: IMF, April), pp.


At "Promoting Global Growth and Domestic Economic Security," 35th Annual NABE Economic Policy Conference, Washington, D.C.
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in the 35th Annual Economic Policy Conference of the National Association for Business Economics.
Before we begin our conversation, I want to share a few thoughts about the outlook for the economy and monetary policy.1
economy expanded at a robust pace in 2018, and my baseline outlook for 2019 foresees somewhat slower but still-solid growth in the year ahead.
In July, just about four months from now, the current economic expansion will become the longest on record.
The Federal Reserve is charged by the Congress with achieving and sustaining a dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability, and the economy is as close as it has been in many years to meeting these goals.
The unemployment rate is near the lowest level recorded in 50 years, and average monthly job gains have continued to well outpace the increases needed over the longer run to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force.
Most measures of nominal wage growth are running at or somewhat above the 3 percent pace, and recent wage gains have been strongest for lower-skilled workers.
Moreover, the strength of the labor market appears to have encouraged people to join the labor force and others, who might have left it, to continue working.
The labor force participation rate--the share of people who are either working or looking for work--has moved up 1/2 percentage point over the past year, and the participation rate of prime-age workers (those 25 to 54 years old) has risen about 1-1/2 percentage points over the past few years.
Inflation, as measured by the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE), is estimated to have been a little bit below 2 percent of late, largely because of recent declines in energy prices.
Market-based measures of inflation compensation have moved lower, on net, since last summer, though they have increased some recently, and some survey-based measures of longer-term inflation expectations are little changed.
That said, taken together, the evidence suggests that measures of expected inflation are at the lower end of a range that I consider to be consistent with our price-stability goal of 2 percent PCE inflation.
While my baseline outlook for growth, employment, and inflation is a positive one, a number of crosscurrents that are buffeting the economy bear careful scrutiny.
As I have indicated in recent speeches, monetary policy at this juncture needs to be especially data dependent, with the federal funds rate now in the range of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' estimates of its longer-run neutral level.
Moreover, with employment and inflation now at or close to our dual-mandate objectives, the FOMC in its January statement indicated it can afford to be patient as we assess the need for further adjustments in our policy stance.2 Going forward, we need, I believe, to be cognizant of the balance we must strike between (1) being forward looking and (2) maximizing the odds of being right given the reality that the models that we consult are not infallible.
Given muted inflation and stable inflation expectations, I believe we can be patient and allow the data to flow in as we determine what future adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate may be appropriate to strike this balance.
We also decided at our January meeting to maintain our current operating regime‑‑a "floor" system--for implementing monetary policy.3 The FOMC will continue to set the stance of policy by establishing the target range for the federal funds rate.
The interest on excess reserves rate will be our primary tool to keep the federal funds rate in the target range.
In this regime, we will provide an ample supply of reserves in the banking system to ensure that we remain on the flat portion of the reserve demand curve and that the federal funds rate is insulated from shocks to reserve demand and supply.
With this decision on our operating regime made, the Committee can now decide on the appropriate timing and pace for concluding our balance sheet drawdown.
In the longer run, the ultimate size of the balance sheet will be determined by the demand for Federal Reserve liabilities such as currency and reserve balances.
Finally, in November, we announced a review of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy strategy, tools, and communications practices.
In this review, we will listen carefully to a broad range of stakeholders offering a full range of perspectives from across the country, and we will draw on these insights as we assess how best to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability in the most robust fashion possible.
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants.
I am grateful to Brian Doyle of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, January 30.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization," press release, January 30.

There is a stubbornly persistent lack of diversity in the economics profession.2 Year after year, minorities and women are underrepresented in the pool of individuals awarded a doctorate in economics in the United States relative to their share in the broader population, and the gap is especially acute for women of color.
The American Economic Association reports that in the 2016-17 academic year, seven black/African American women were awarded a doctorate in economics in the United States, along with eight black/African American men, out of a total pool of 1,150 economics Ph.D.'s awarded overall.
A growing body of research and evidence makes clear that the quality of the economics profession and its contribution to society will be greater when a broader range of people are engaged.5 Research shows that greater diversity results in better outcomes--it broadens the range of ideas and perspectives brought to bear on solving problems, and it brings important insights to the analysis of our economy.
Turning to my own institution, it is notable that when the Congress established the Federal Reserve System, it took great care to ensure there would be a diversity of perspectives around the decisionmaking table in terms of regional representation.
That is why we have 12 Reserve Bank Districts represented on the Federal Open Market Committee.
For instance, it was not until 2017, more than 100 years after the creation of the Federal Reserve, that the first African American, Raphael Bostic, was chosen to lead a Reserve Bank.
We need to do better than that, and we will continue our efforts until the group of people around that table is more like America.
Of course, the Federal Reserve System hires people with all kinds of expertise--from lawyers to law enforcement, from financial analysts to data scientists.
But our footprint is especially large in the economics job market, where as a System we routinely hire one of every 25 newly minted economics Ph.D.'s each year.
I have discussed why it is important for the Federal Reserve and for our economy to see more women of color embracing the field of economics.
In my case, although I did not have an undergraduate economics degree, I later decided to pursue advanced study in economics because it provided a rigorous analytical framework and approach to data to address important problems facing America.
Growing up, I saw how every family's well-being is affected by their financial resilience and their economic opportunities.
I decided to study economics because it provides powerful tools to help promote a better future for many Americans.
I have found different ways to approach that throughout my career--from teaching the next generation of problem solvers, to assessing the challenges facing American manufacturers, to seeing the potential of microfinance for financial inclusion, to promoting maximum employment and stable inflation in my current job.
But now there are a number of leading scholars and practitioners in the field to provide inspiration and serve as role models.
Lisa Cook, who will share with you their perspectives and discuss their important and interesting work.
Amanda Bayer and David Wilcox, "The Unequal Distribution of Economic Education: A Report on the Race, Ethnicity, and Gender of Economics Majors at U.S.
Colleges and Universities (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-105 (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System).
Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Elena Rouse, "Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem," Journal of Economic Perspectives 30 (Fall 2016): 221-42.

Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York
When I was asked to participate on this panel in the middle of last year, the prevailing metaphor regarding Federal Reserve balance sheet policy was "as boring as watching paint dry." Well, times have changed, and I commend the conference organizers for their foresight.
Today I would like to discuss some of the recent decisions that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has made regarding the balance sheet and lay out a rough framework for some further issues that are on the horizon.1
In January, after much discussion, including in previous meetings, the FOMC announced its intent to continue operating in a framework of ample reserves.2 In this regime, active management of the reserve supply is not needed.
The Federal Reserve controls the level of the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates primarily through the use of administered rates, including the rate paid on reserve balances and the offered rate on overnight reverse repurchase agreements.
This regime is sometimes referred to as a floor system, because the administered rates place a floor under the rate at which banks and others will lend in the federal funds market.
In adopting this framework, the Committee stated its intention to continue operating as it has for the past decade.
The announcement was an important step in our normalization process.
And we are now set up to make further decisions on the eventual size and composition of our balance sheet.
The most important factor in the decision was that the current system has worked very well.
It has supported the achievement of our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
And it has shown itself to be flexible and well suited to maintaining interest rate control through various changes in money markets, bank regulation, and the Federal Reserve's balance sheet.
Since the FOMC began lifting interest rates in December 2015, money market rates have generally moved closely with the federal funds rate, which in turn has followed changes in administered rates.
Now that the decision on the operating framework has been made, a natural next step is to contemplate the appropriate size of the Fed's balance sheet and reserves and the process for getting there.
In line with the requirements of operating with ample reserves--and boosted by the growth in nonreserve liabilities--the Fed will maintain a larger balance sheet and reserve supply relative to the pre-crisis period, with the goal of remaining on the flat portion of the reserve demand curve.
I would note that reserves have already declined appreciably from their peak, falling by $1.2 trillion to a current level of around $1.6 trillion.
In our statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, we outlined an intention to hold no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively.3 As the balance sheet continues to shrink, we are now in the process of determining that necessary size.
Ultimately, the size of the balance sheet will be determined by a number of factors, including demand for nonreserve liabilities, such as currency (which has been rising), and, importantly, the quantity of reserves necessary to remain reliably on the flat portion of the reserve demand curve.
Survey results suggest that banks have greatly increased their demand for reserves in the post-crisis period.
Responses to the September 2018 Senior Financial Officer Survey report that banks would be comfortable with a level of reserves in the system in the neighborhood of $800 billion, taking into consideration the level of interest rates at the time.4 In part, this increased demand reflects a response to regulatory changes introduced after the crisis.
These changes include, importantly, the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR), which has improved banks' liquidity resilience by requiring firms to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets to cover potential outflows during times of stress.
Reserves, along with Treasury securities, are favored under the LCR, and, consequently, firms currently meet a sizable fraction of their LCR requirements by holding reserves.
Notwithstanding survey results, the level of reserve demand remains quite uncertain.
It is possible that, over time, the preferences of banks will shift, or that demand will prove more price elastic than banks are currently expecting.
As I have discussed previously, bank holdings of reserves to meet LCR requirements could shift toward Treasury securities, as aggregate reserves decline, without much upward pressure on the federal funds rate.5 That said, even if uncertain, it is probably safe to say that reserve demand is much higher than before the crisis.
For example, we could operate with a level of reserve balances at the lower end of what might be considered ample.
In that case, there would likely be occasions when unexpected declines in the supply of reserves or increases in the demand for reserves would require an open market operation to offset temporary upward pressures on the federal funds rate.
Alternatively, we could operate with an average supply of reserves large enough to keep the federal funds rate determined along the flat portion of the reserve demand curve even with an unexpected shift in the supply of or demand for reserves.
This approach would be operationally convenient but would also leave the size of the balance sheet and reserves larger than necessary most of the time.
In my view, it might be appropriate for us to operate somewhere in between these two extremes, with a sizable quantity of reserves large enough to buffer against most shocks to reserve supply.
On those few days when that buffer is likely to be exhausted, we could conduct open market operations to temporarily boost the supply of reserves.
With so much uncertainty over the level and slope of the reserve demand curve, a degree of caution is warranted.
As outlined in the minutes of the January FOMC meeting, the Committee has discussed ending the reduction in the Fed's aggregate asset holdings sometime in the latter half of this year, with still-ample reserves in the system.6 At that point, one option discussed, without any decision being made at this point, is to hold the level of total assets roughly fixed for a time.
Even as the total size of the balance sheet remains fixed, the composition of the liabilities would gradually change, in part as demand for currency grows in line with the economy.
Over time, the gradual increase in nonreserve liabilities would displace reserves as the overall balance sheet remains fixed.
This plan would substantially reduce the pace of the decline in reserves, allowing us to gradually approach our assessment of the appropriate amount of reserves for the efficient and effective implementation of monetary policy.
Of course, in the longer run, once we reach our preferred level of reserves, the balance sheet would have to resume growth to match a continued increase in demand for nonreserve liabilities.
I would like to wrap up with a brief discussion of some of the other decision points we will encounter as we continue the process of normalizing our balance sheet.
In particular, what does the Committee judge to be normal in regard to the type and duration of assets that we will hold? On composition, in line with our previously announced normalization principles, I favor a return to a balance sheet with all Treasury securities, allowing our mortgage-backed securities (MBS) holdings to run to zero.
In regard to duration, moving to shorten the duration of our holdings could increase the Fed's ability to affect long-term interest rates if the need arose.
However, it might be preferable to have the composition of our Treasury holdings roughly match the maturity composition of outstanding Treasury securities, minimizing any market distortions that could arise from our holdings.
Finally, in assessing our balance sheet policy, it is important to point out that the Fed remains entirely focused on meeting its statutory dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
The normalization of the balance sheet is not a competing goal.
If ever it appears that our plans for the balance sheet are running counter to the achievement of our dual-mandate objectives, we would quickly reassess our approach to the balance sheet.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
For more information, see the Committee's Statement Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation and Balance Sheet Normalization, which is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20190130c.htm.
The Committee's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans were adopted on September 16, 2014, and can be found on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_policynormalization.pdf.
The FOMC adopted addenda to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans on March 18, 2015 (PDF), and on June 13, 2017 (PDF).
Quarles (2018), "Liquidity Regulation and the Size of the Fed's Balance Sheet," speech delivered at "Currencies, Capital, and Central Bank Balances: A Policy Conference," a Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., May 4.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2019), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, January 29-30, 2019," press release, February 20.

The Federal Reserve's Review of Its Monetary Policy Strategy, Tools, and Communication Practices
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, New York, New York
Monetary Policy Forum, which, since its inception, has brought together policymakers, academics, and market participants to share ideas and perspectives on U.S.
Today I would like to discuss the broad review of the Federal Reserve's monetary policy framework that we are undertaking this year.
We will examine the policy strategy, tools, and communication practices that we use to pursue our dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability.
In my remarks, I will describe the motivation for and scope of this review and will preview some of the events we are planning as part of it.1 The U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum is an excellent venue for this presentation.
For more than a decade, it has focused attention and timely analysis on critical issues confronting the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).
Its programs have drawn on the latest economic research and considered a range of views.
Similarly, the Federal Reserve's review of its monetary policy framework will be transparent, will be open minded, and will seek perspectives from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including academics, other specialists, and the public at large.
The fact that the System is conducting this review does not suggest that we are dissatisfied with the existing policy framework.
Indeed, we believe our existing framework has served us well, helping us effectively achieve our statutorily assigned dual-mandate goals of maximum employment and price stability.
Nonetheless, in light of the unprecedented events of the past decade, we believe it is a good time to step back and assess whether, and in what possible ways, we can refine our strategy, tools, and communication practices to achieve and maintain these goals as consistently and robustly as possible.2 I note that central banks in other countries have conducted periodic reviews of their monetary policy frameworks, and their experience has informed the approach we are pursuing.
economy operating at or close to our maximum-employment and price-stability goals, now is an especially opportune time to conduct this review.
The unemployment rate is near a multidecade low, and inflation is running close to our 2 percent objective.
By conducting this review, we want to ensure that we are well positioned to continue to meet our statutory goals in coming years.
In addition, the Federal Reserve used new policy tools and enhanced its communication practices in response to the Global Financial Crisis and the Great Recession, and the review will evaluate these changes.
and foreign economies have significantly evolved since the pre-crisis experience that informed much of the research that provided the foundation for our current approach.
Perhaps most significantly, neutral interest rates appear to have fallen in the United States and abroad.3 Moreover, this global decline in r* is widely expected to persist for years.
The decline in neutral policy rates likely reflects several factors, including aging populations, changes in risk-taking behavior, and a slowdown in technology growth.
These factors' contributions are highly uncertain, but irrespective of their precise role, the policy implications of the decline in neutral rates are important.
All else being equal, a fall in neutral rates increases the likelihood that a central bank's policy rate will reach its effective lower bound (ELB) in future economic downturns.
That development, in turn, could make it more difficult during downturns for monetary policy to support spending and employment, and keep inflation from falling too low.4
Another key development in recent decades is that inflation appears less responsive to resource slack.
That is, the short-run Phillips curve appears to have flattened, implying a change in the dynamic relationship between inflation and employment.5 A flatter Phillips curve is, in a sense, a proverbial double-edged sword.
It permits the Federal Reserve to support employment more aggressively during downturns‑‑as was the case during and after the Great Recession--because a sustained inflation breakout is less likely when the Phillips curve is flatter.6 However, a flatter Phillips curve also increases the cost, in terms of economic output, of reversing unwelcome increases in longer-run inflation expectations.
Thus, a flatter Phillips curve makes it all the more important that longer-run inflation expectations remain anchored at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.7
In the Federal Reserve Act, the Congress assigned the Federal Reserve the responsibility to conduct monetary policy "so as to promote effectively the goals of maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates."8 Our review this year will take this statutory mandate as given and will also take as given that inflation at a rate of 2 percent is most consistent over the longer run with the congressional mandate.
Our existing monetary policy strategy is laid out in the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.9 First adopted in January 2012, the statement has been reaffirmed at the start of each subsequent year, including at the FOMC's meeting last month with unanimous support from all 17 FOMC participants.
The statement indicates that the Committee seeks to mitigate deviations of inflation from 2 percent and deviations of employment from assessments of its maximum level.
In doing so, the FOMC recognizes that these assessments of maximum employment are necessarily uncertain and subject to revision.
According to the Federal Reserve Act, the employment objective is on an equal footing with the inflation objective.
As a practical matter, our current strategy shares many elements with the policy framework known in the research literature as "flexible inflation targeting."10 However, the Fed's mandate is much more explicit about the role of employment than that of most flexible inflation-targeting central banks, and our statement reflects this by stating that when the two sides of the mandate are in conflict, neither one takes precedent over the other.
We believe this transparency about the balanced approach the FOMC takes has served us well over the past decade when high unemployment called for extraordinary policies that entailed some risk of inflation.
The first question is, "Can the Federal Reserve best meet its statutory objectives with its existing monetary policy strategy, or should it consider strategies that aim to reverse past misses of the inflation objective?"
Under our current approach as well as that of most flexible inflation-targeting central banks around the world, the persistent shortfalls of inflation from 2 percent that many advanced economies have experienced over most of the past decade are treated as "bygones." This means that policy today is not adjusted to offset past inflation shortfalls with future overshoots of the inflation target (nor do persistent overshoots of inflation trigger policies that aim to undershoot the inflation target).
Central banks are generally believed to have effective tools for preventing persistent inflation overshoots, but the effective lower bound on interest rates makes persistent undershoots more likely.
Persistent inflation shortfalls carry the risk that longer-term inflation expectations become poorly anchored or become anchored below the stated inflation goal.11
In part because of that concern, some economists have advocated "makeup" strategies under which policymakers seek to undo, in part or in whole, past inflation deviations from target.
Such strategies include targeting average inflation over a multiyear period and price-level targeting, in which policymakers seek to stabilize the price level around a constant growth path.12 These strategies could be implemented either permanently or as a temporary response to extraordinary circumstances.
For example, the central bank could commit, at the time when the policy rate reaches the ELB, to maintain the policy rate at this level until inflation over the ELB period has, on average, run at the target rate.13 Other makeup strategies seek to reverse shortfalls in policy accommodation at the ELB by keeping the policy rate lower for longer than otherwise would be the case.14 In many models that incorporate the ELB, these makeup strategies lead to better average performance on both legs of the dual mandate and thereby, viewed over time, provide no conflict between the dual-mandate goals.15
The benefits of the makeup strategies rest heavily on households and firms believing in advance that the makeup will, in fact, be delivered when the time comes--for example, that a persistent inflation shortfall will be met by future inflation above 2 percent.
As is well known from the research literature, makeup strategies, in general, are not time consistent because when the time comes to push inflation above 2 percent, conditions at that time will not warrant doing so.
Because of this time inconsistency, any makeup strategy, to be successful, would have to be understood by the public to represent a credible commitment.
That important real-world consideration is often neglected in the academic literature, in which central bank "commitment devices" are simply assumed to exist and be instantly credible on decree.
The next question the review will consider is, "Are the existing monetary policy tools adequate to achieve and maintain maximum employment and price stability, or should the toolkit be expanded? And, if so, how?" The FOMC's primary means of changing the stance of monetary policy is by adjusting its target range for the federal funds rate.
In the fall of 2008, the FOMC cut that target to just above zero in response to financial turmoil and deteriorating economic conditions.
economy required additional policy accommodation after the ELB was reached, the FOMC deployed two additional tools in the years following the crisis: balance sheet policies and forward guidance regarding the likely path of the federal funds rate.16
The FOMC altered the size and composition of the Fed's balance sheet through a sequence of three large-scale securities purchase programs, via a maturity extension program, and by adjusting the reinvestment of principal payments on maturing securities.
Overall, the empirical evidence suggests that these added tools helped stem the crisis and support economic recovery by strengthening the labor market and lifting inflation back toward 2 percent.
In addition to assessing the efficacy of these existing tools, we will consider additional tools to ease policy when the ELB is binding.
For example, as is presently Bank of Japan policy, the FOMC could, when the ELB is binding, establish a temporary ceiling for Treasury yields at longer maturities by standing ready to purchase them at a preannounced floor price.18 During the crisis and its aftermath, the Federal Reserve reviewed but ultimately found this tool and some others deployed by foreign central banks wanting relative to the alternatives it did pursue.
The third question the review will consider is, "How can the FOMC's communication of its policy framework and implementation be improved?" Our communication practices have evolved considerably since 1994, when the Federal Reserve released the first statement after an FOMC meeting.
Over the past decade or so, the FOMC has enhanced its communication practices to promote public understanding of its policy goals, strategy, and actions, as well as to foster democratic accountability.
These enhancements include the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy; postmeeting press conferences; various statements about principles and strategy guiding the Committee's normalization of monetary policy; and quarterly summaries of individual FOMC participants' economic projections, assessments about the appropriate path of the federal funds rate, and judgments of the uncertainty and balance of risks around their projections.19
For example, there might be ways to improve communication about the coordination of policy tools or the interplay between monetary policy and financial stability.
The review will have several components.20 The Board and the Reserve Banks will be conducting town hall-style "Fed Listens" events this year.
We will hear from a broad range of interested individuals and groups, including business and labor leaders, community development professionals, and academics.
Another is scheduled at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis in early April, and other Reserve Banks will host events over the course of the year.
In addition, we will sponsor a System research conference on June 4-5, 2019, at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, with speakers and panelists from outside the Fed.
The sessions will include overviews by academic experts of themes that are central to the review, including the FOMC's monetary policy since the financial crisis, assessments of the maximum sustainable level of employment, alternative policy frameworks and strategies to achieve the dual mandate, policy tools, global considerations, financial stability considerations, and central bank communications.
Other sessions will feature panels of community leaders who will share their perspectives on the labor market and the effects of interest rates on their constituencies.
Building on the perspectives we hear and on staff analysis, the FOMC will conduct its own assessment of its monetary policy framework, beginning around the middle of the year.
The economy is constantly evolving, bringing with it new policy challenges.
What I can say is that any refinements or more material changes to our framework that we might make will be aimed solely at enhancing our ability to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives in the world we live in today.
"Discretionary Monetary Policy and the Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"The Signaling Channel for Federal Reserve Bond Purchases (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Great Recession: Estimating the Macroeconomic Effects of a Spread Compression at the Zero Lower Bound (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Pioneering Price Level Targeting: The Swedish Experience 1931-1937," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14.
"Temporary Price-Level Targeting: An Alternative Framework for Monetary Policy," Ben Bernanke's Blog, October 12.
"Inflation and Activity--Two Explorations and their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/5/230.
"Has Monetary Policy Become More Effective?" Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.
"How Has the Monetary Transmission Mechanism Evolved over Time?" in Benjamin M.
Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol.
"The Natural Rate of Interest: Estimates, Drivers, and Challenges to Monetary Policy (PDF)," Occasional Paper Series 217.
"The Case of the Disappearing Phillips Curve (PDF)," speech delivered at the 2018 ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 19.
"Macroeconomic Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF), report prepared for the 2017 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, March 3.
"The Macroeconomic Effects of Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes," Economic Journal, vol.
"Monetary Policy Options at the Effective Lower Bound: Assessing the Federal Reserve's Current Policy Toolkit," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2019-003.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"What Has--and Has Not--Been Learned about Monetary Policy in a Low‐Inflation Environment? A Review of the 2000s," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
"The Federal Reserve's Large‐Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects," Economic Journal, vol.
"The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no.
"The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"The Federal Reserve's Framework for Monetary Policy: Recent Changes and New Questions," IMF Economic Review, vol.
"Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Forecasting Inflation," in Graham Elliott, Clive Grander, and Allan Timmermann, eds., Handbook of Economic Forecasting, vol.
“Should the Fed Regularly Evaluate Its Monetary Policy Framework? (PDF)” paper presented at the Brookings Papers on Economic Activity Conference, Fall, held at the Brookings Institution, Washington, September 13-14.
"Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? (PDF)" FRBNY Economic Policy Review, vol.
"The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"From Taylor's Rule to Bernanke's Temporary Price Level Targeting (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-051.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
"The Risky Steady State and the Interest Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-009.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," Journal of International Economics, vol.
"The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing in the United Kingdom (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Quantitative Easing and Unconventional Monetary Policy--An Introduction," Economic Journal, vol.
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"Measuring the 'World' Real Interest Rate (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 19887.
"Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10.
"Optimal and Simple Monetary Policy Rules with Zero Floor on the Nominal Interest Rate (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Average Inflation Targeting," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Are Low Real Interest Rates Here to Stay? (PDF)" International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Monetary Policy and Inflation Dynamics," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"A New Data Set on Monetary Policy: The Economic Forecasts of Individual Members of the FOMC," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Do Inflation-Targeting Central Banks Implicitly Target the Price Level? (PDF)" International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was it Just Sleeping? (PDF)" in World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.
"Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper Series 23311.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April (revised August 2018).
"The Federal Reserve Is Not Very Constrained by the Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates," NBER Working Paper Series 25123.
"Methods of Policy Accommodation at the Interest-Rate Lower Bound (PDF)," paper presented at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1.
"Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24.
"The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., January 19.
Fuhrer and others (2018) explore the desirability of comprehensive reviews of the monetary policy framework.
They argue that such reviews may help the Fed more effectively identify and implement needed changes to its framework.
For evidence of a fall in neutral rates of interest in the United States and abroad, see, among several contributions, King and Low (2014); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Rachel and Smith (2017); and Brand, Bielecki, and Penalver (2018).
monetary policy will be constrained by the ELB and its implications for economic activity and inflation, see Kiley and Roberts (2017), Erceg and others (2018), Swanson (2018), and Chung and others (2019).
For evidence of a flattening of the slope of the Phillips curve in the United States and abroad, see, among others, Simon, Matheson, and Sandri (2013); Blanchard, Cerutti, and Summers (2015); and Bank for International Settlements (2017).
One potential contributor to the flattening of the Phillips curve is a change in the conduct of monetary policy since the 1980s toward greater stabilization of inflation and economic activity; for evidence of such a change, see Clarida, Galí, and Gertler (2000); Boivin and Giannoni (2006); and Boivin, Kiley, and Mishkin (2010).
As discussed in Roberts (2006) and Bullard (2018), greater stabilization on the part of a central bank can lead to the estimation of flatter Phillips curves in reduced-form regressions.
Similarly, the adoption of an explicit inflation objective, along with greater certainty regarding the conduct of monetary policy, can help anchor longer-term inflation expectations and stabilize actual inflation in response to shocks.
See Yellen (2015) for a discussion of inflation dynamics and monetary policy; see Erceg and others (2018) for a quantitative exploration of the monetary policy implications of a flat Phillips curve in an uncertain economic environment.
Since the mid-1980s, movements in both realized inflation and measures of longer-term inflation expectations have been somewhat muted, complicating the task of extracting the precise role of inflation expectations as a determinant of realized inflation.
Faust and Wright (2013) review the literature on inflation forecasting and present evidence in support of the conclusion that measures of inflation expectations help predict the trend in inflation.
In a paper discussed at this forum two years ago, Cecchetti and others (2017) showed that while the level of realized inflation and four-quarter-ahead inflation expectations are positively correlated, changes in these variables have been largely uncorrelated since the mid-1980s.
These authors suggest that, in a low and stable inflation environment, policymakers should pay attention to a wide array of other indicators in determining the implications of movements in realized inflation and measures of inflation expectations.
Even though the act lists three distinct goals, the Federal Reserve's mandate for monetary policy is commonly known as the "dual mandate." The reason is that an economy in which people who want to work either have a job or are likely to find one fairly quickly and in which the price level (meaning a broad measure of the price of goods and services purchased by consumers) is stable creates the conditions needed for interest rates to settle at moderate levels.
These risks could be exacerbated if households and businesses expect monetary policy to be insufficiently accommodative because of proximity to the ELB.
Eggertsson and Woodford (2003) provide an early discussion of how optimal monetary policy at the ELB entails a commitment to reflate the price level during the subsequent economic expansion.
Nessén and Vestin (2005) discuss the relationship between average inflation targeting and price-level targeting.
There is a dearth of empirical evidence on strategies seeking to make up for inflation deviations.
Central banks that pursue an inflation goal generally seek to achieve a specific rate of inflation by some time horizon--typically a couple years ahead or over the "medium run"--without regard to past inflation deviations.
One exception is the Reserve Bank of Australia, whose inflation goal is specified as a range of "2-3 per cent, on average, over the medium term" and thus might embed some notion of history dependence.
However, Ruge-Murcia (2014) argues that the drift in the price level in Australia is comparable with the drifts observed in economies with purely forward-looking specification of the inflation goal.
See also Kiley and Roberts (2017) for a strategy in which policymakers aim for inflation higher than 2 percent during economic expansions to compensate for below-target realizations of inflation during economic downturns.
See Reifschneider and Williams (2000) for a strategy in which a central bank following a Taylor rule makes up for shortfalls in policy accommodation during ELB episodes by subsequently keeping the policy rate lower than otherwise.
The box "Complexities of Monetary Policy Rules" in the Board's July 2018 Monetary Policy Report contains an application of such a modified rule; see Board of Governors (2018, pp.
See English, López-Salido, and Tetlow (2015) for applications of flexible price-level targeting and nominal income-targeting strategies to a quantitative model of the U.S.
As an illustration of the shortfall in policy support created by a binding ELB during the Global Financial Crisis, the simple policy rules considered in a January 2017 speech by then-Chair Janet Yellen prescribed setting the federal funds rate between negative 1-1/2 and negative 9 percent; see Yellen (2017).
In addition to using these two additional monetary policy tools, the Federal Reserve implemented a number of other measures to stabilize the financial system, increase households and business confidence, and more generally support the economic recovery.
These supplementary measures included the setting up of several credit facilities and the introduction of stress tests for systemically important financial institutions.
On the transmission channels of balance sheet policies, see D'Amico and others (2012), Joyce and others (2012), Clarida (2012), Woodford (2012), and Bauer and Rudebusch (2014).
On the financial market effects of balance sheet policies, see Gagnon and others (2011), Joyce and others (2011), Hamilton and Wu (2012), D'Amico and King (2013), and Swanson (2017).
For discussions of the macroeconomic effects of these policy actions, see Chen, Cúrdia, and Ferrero (2012); Baumeister and Benati (2013); Engen, Laubach, and Reifschneider (2015); Chung and others (2019), and the references therein.
Compared with asset purchases during the financial crisis, this approach might give us greater rate control at medium to long maturities but carry a risk that the Federal Reserve's balance sheet could become unduly large.
In September 2016, the Bank of Japan announced a target for the yield on the Japanese 10-year government bond and stated its commitment to expand the monetary base until inflation exceeded its 2 percent objective and stayed above that level in a stable manner.
Starting in 1979, the Federal Reserve published a summary of individual economic projections from various Board members, FOMC members, or FOMC participants in the semiannual Monetary Policy Report.
With the introduction of the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) in 2007, the FOMC increased the frequency of the releases of policymaker projections, expanded the set of economic variables included, and extended the forecast horizon.
Because the SEP includes individual contributions of projections and assessments from all FOMC participants, it captures a broader range of views than those of FOMC members.

At “Rural Places, Rural Spaces: Closing Financial Services Gaps in Persistent Poverty America,” a policy forum sponsored by Hope Enterprise Corporation, Mississippi Valley State University, Itta Bena, Mississippi
MVSU and other historically black colleges and universities, or HBCUs, play a crucial role in their communities.
Today, data at the national level show a strong economy.
Unemployment is near a half-century low, and economic output is growing at a solid pace.
The Federal Reserve can help by carrying out our monetary policy mission of supporting maximum employment and price stability.
We also support strong communities by conducting research, promoting community development, and enforcing laws like the Community Reinvestment Act, which helps ensure that people have adequate access to financial services wherever they live.
We not only work with communities, we are in communities, through the presence of our 12 regional Reserve Banks.
Indeed, 70 percent of the 473 "persistent poverty" counties in the United States are rural.2 Unemployment and mortality rates remain high in these communities.
Along with lower incomes and wealth, the rate of business start-ups in these areas is lower.
These areas also generally lack diverse industries and employment options and often have suffered from a decline in a traditional industry.
High-quality education and training play a crucial role in extending opportunity in rural areas, starting with early childhood education.5 But in many rural communities, access to high-quality preschool education is limited.
Returnees often bring back important skills and experiences and make meaningful contributions to the local economy.9
He wasn't gone long, though, before he felt called to return to make his home here in the Delta.
As with Tim and his clients, entrepreneurship opportunities can motivate residents who have left rural communities to return home‑‑or to keep them from moving away in the first place.
Business ownership represents an important source of income and wealth for both owners and their employees.
Recognizing this fact, successful communities find ways to help residents turn what they know and do best, including skills they may have gained from industries in decline, into profitable small businesses.10 One example of a community taking this approach is Clarksdale, Mississippi.
About 10 years ago, civic and business leaders assessed what made Clarksdale special and how those characteristics could help the community thrive.
This growth is also creating new businesses not directly related to tourism--businesses such as Urgent and Primary Care of Clarksdale.
DeWitt, Arkansas, is another rural community where entrepreneurship is sparking a local revival.
The economy there is a mix of manufacturing and agriculture, and many families have farmed the land for generations, such as the family of Tami and Troy Hornbeck.
More recently, they have been helping lead a new industry in their community using waste vegetable oil from local restaurants and oil pressed from camelina, a crop farmers are beginning to grow locally.
This cooperative effort involves a partnership between a community college, a university, the local government, farmers and restaurants, and a Community Development Financial Institution, or CDFI, among others.11 While still in the early stages, it has led to the creation of several new businesses and imbued the town with a new sense of what is possible.
Williams need support to succeed, the kind of support HBCUs and other institutions of higher education have long provided.
Entrepreneurship has the potential to play a greater role in poor rural areas, particularly in areas whose residents are predominantly black and other people of color.
Recent surveys have found relatively high levels of interest in owning businesses among young people of color.12 Indeed, nationwide, black women represent one of the fastest growing groups of entrepreneurs.13 Yet research by the Federal Reserve suggests people of color experience greater challenges in gaining access to credit to start or expand businesses, which leads me to my last topic and the focus of this forum: access to financial services.14
And racial wealth disparities make black students more likely than white students to borrow for their education.15 Similarly, racial wealth disparities mean access to credit is critical for would-be entrepreneurs who must borrow to supplement personal savings and support from friends and family.
Banks often consider credit scores when evaluating loan requests, however, and high-poverty regions tend to have a larger percentage of people with no established credit rating or a low credit score.
This combination of low wealth and low credit scores limits access to credit or causes borrowers to turn to higher-cost credit.
Fortunately, CDFIs are helping potential borrowers improve their creditworthiness and providing them with safe and affordable credit.
While CDFIs fill a critical gap in some communities, most consumers use other banks and credit unions.
In rural areas, this often means a community bank.16 Industry consolidation has led to a long-term decline in the number of community banks.
While most rural communities continue to be relatively well served, that is less often the case in communities with high-poverty rates.17
In 2018, Federal Reserve staff members met with leaders in rural areas across the country that had recently experienced a bank branch closure.
At the Fed, we have renewed our efforts to avoid unnecessary regulatory burden on community banks, which provide essential credit in their local communities.
Another means to address the issue of branch closures is the Community Reinvestment Act, or CRA, which encourages banks to help meet the credit needs of the communities they are chartered to serve.
The CRA has been an important tool for strengthening local communities.
The trend toward fewer branches and increased use of technology to deliver financial services presents a particular challenge to our current approach to CRA evaluations.
To the extent that banks serve much broader areas using online or other non-branch delivery systems, or have so many assessment areas that examiners cannot do a thorough evaluation in each, the financial needs of many rural communities may be overlooked.
We believe that revisions to the CRA's implementing regulations should more effectively encourage banks to seek opportunities in underserved areas.19
For a history of the role of HBCUs, see, for example, Todd Greene and Ashley Bozarth (2018), "The Critical Role of Historically Black Colleges and Universities in Workforce Development," in Stuart Andreason, Todd Greene, Heath Prince, and Carl E.
As defined in PL 115-31 as counties where 20 percent or more of the population live in poverty as measured by the U.S.
Census Bureau in the 1990 and 2000 decennial censuses (for more information, see https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/saipe/guidance/model-input-data/decennial.html) and the 2011‑2015 American Community Survey.
See, for example, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (2012), "From Textiles to Turnaround: A Tale of Two Cities," Economic Development Podcast, July; Karl Rhodes (2013), "The Future of Coal" (PDF), Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Econ Focus, vol.
Shell (2018), "60% of District's Jobs Could Face Automation in the Next 20 Years," Federal Reserve Bank of St.
19-20, 22-23; and Charles Davidson (2017), "Tending to the Farm, Part 3: Technology Reshapes Agriculture," Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, Economy Matters, January 12.
See, for example, Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez (2014), "Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
Rockoff (2014), "Measuring the Impacts of Teachers II: Teacher Value-Added and Student Outcomes in Adulthood," American Economic Review, vol.
See Kate Dunham, Annelies Goger, Jennifer Henderson-Frakes, and Nichole Tucker (2005), Workforce Development in Rural Areas: Changes in Access, Service Delivery and Partnerships (PDF), U.S.
Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration Occasional Paper 2005-07 (Oakland, Calif.: Social Policy Research Associates, June).
See John Cromartie, Christiane von Reichert, and Ryan Arthun (2015), Factors Affecting Former Residents' Returning to Rural Communities (PDF), USDA Economic Research Service Report No.
Such support systems generally include consistent and easily accessible ways for potential business owners to find the advice, financing, and education they need to be successful.
See Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (2015), Grow Your Own: Entrepreneurship-Based Economic Development for Local Communities (PDF) (Kansas City, Mo.: FRB Kansas City).
CDFI Certification is a designation given by the CDFI Fund of the U.S.
CDFIs include regulated institutions, such as community development banks and credit unions, and nonregulated institutions, like loan and venture capital funds.
Alicia Robb, Mels de Zeeuw, and Brett Barkley (2018), "Mind the Gap: How Do Credit Market Experiences and Borrowing Patterns Differ for Minority-Owned Firms?" Community and Economic Development Discussion Paper 03-18 (Atlanta: Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, September).
See Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond and Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta (2017), Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Rural Employer Firms (PDF) (Richmond, Va.: FRB Richmond).
Quarles (2018), "Trends in Urban and Rural Community Banks," speech delivered at "Community Banking in the 21st Century," Sixth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, St.
According to 2017 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Summary of Deposits data, nonmetro Persistent Poverty Counties had, on average, 0.36 bank branches per 1,000 people, compared with 0.53 for other nonmetro counties.
Nguyen (2014), "Do Bank Branches Still Matter? The Effect of Closings on Local Economic Outcomes (PDF)," Massachusetts Institute of Technology Working Paper (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT, December); and O.
Emre Ergungor (2006), "Bank Branch Presence and Access to Credit in Low-to-Moderate Income Neighborhoods," Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Working Paper 06-16 (Cleveland, Ohio: FRB Cleveland, December).
See Lael Brainard (2018), "Keeping Community at the Heart of the Community Reinvestment Act," speech delivered at the Association of Neighborhood and Housing Development Eighth Annual Community Development Conference, New York, May 18.

At the Conference for Community Bankers, sponsored by the American Bankers Association, San Diego, California
It is a pleasure to be here today to talk about the Federal Reserve's commitment to and oversight of community banking.
I appreciate the invitation to attend the American Bankers Association's Conference for Community Bankers, as community banking has been a focus of my career and plays a vital role in supporting our economy.
I believe it is particularly important to bring together community bankers at conferences like this to discuss issues impacting your banks and the communities that you serve.
As many of you know, before joining the Federal Reserve, I was a community banker and more recently had the privilege to serve as the Kansas State Bank Commissioner.
While I'm not the first community banker to serve on the Board, I now have the honor of being the first governor to fill the role designated for someone with community banking experience on the Federal Reserve Board, a position that was created by statute in 2015.1 I plan to fulfill this unique responsibility by traveling widely and listening closely to community bankers, consumers, small business owners, community leaders--all of the stakeholders with an interest in this area.
And in the process, I hope to help you better understand what the Federal Reserve is doing and what we are trying to accomplish.
As you all know well, community banks are a critical engine of the economy, and they play a key role in providing access to credit in communities of all sizes--big, small, rural, and every size in between.
Community bankers not only assist in making people's dreams come true--whether the dream is starting a small business, buying a home or farm, or financing a car.
For all of these reasons, and more, I firmly believe a thriving community banking sector is important to the health of the economy.
Like many of you, I witnessed firsthand how community banks were significantly affected by the Global Financial Crisis, a crisis they did not cause.
In my work as state bank commissioner, I learned how bank failures affected cities and towns across the country, and in my home state of Kansas I saw the profound effects a single failure can have on a community.
To ensure that community banks can continue to meet the credit needs of their communities, the Federal Reserve and other banking agencies strive to achieve a fair balance between safety and soundness and reducing unnecessary regulatory burden.
Given the straightforward nature of community banking, regulators have an obligation to develop and refine approaches to supervision that fit the smaller size and less-complex risk profiles of these banks.
If we keep our focus on appropriately tailoring regulatory requirements for community banks so they may continue to prudently thrive, then community bankers should be able to devote more resources and time to serving their customers and communities.
Ultimately, when access to credit is limited, communities suffer and so does the larger economy.
In view of these goals and contributions, and an understanding that systemic risk is not likely to be posed by any single community bank, the Federal Reserve continues to tailor supervision and refine our approach to risk-focused examinations of community banks.
We are also charged with supervising financial institutions to make sure they comply with applicable federal consumer protection laws and regulations.
Here too, we apply a risk-focused approach to consumer compliance supervision, focusing most intensely on those areas involving the greatest compliance risk.
Similarly, we want to ensure that rules that address the risks posed by the business models of the largest banks do not unintentionally create barriers to entry or unnecessary burden for community banks.
During the remaining time with you today, I will touch on the condition of community banks, and supervision and regulation of community banks.
I am also interested in hearing your perspective on the challenges and opportunities in the current community bank landscape.
When I analyze how community banks are faring, I always keep in mind that the range of institutions we call community banks is remarkably diverse.
As Kansas State Bank Commissioner, I oversaw banks that had four employees and less than $20 million in assets up to institutions with more than 100 employees and more than $1 billion in assets.
Though if we look more closely, we can see that three out of four community banks hold assets of less than $500 million.
As a regulator, I am particularly interested in how our work affects institutions of this size.
One good reason for this interest is the distinct contribution community banks make to economic activity.
For example, while community banks account for just 17 percent of financial industry assets, they are responsible for some 53 percent of bank lending to small businesses.
Further, the health of the community banking sector has improved significantly since the financial crisis.
Over the past decade, the majority of community banks have maintained high common equity tier 1 capital levels--consistent with the "well-capitalized" designation under regulatory capital standards.
Though there are considerable challenges to the community bank model, these banks continue to post strong earnings, which, in turn, contribute to healthy capital accounts.
In fact, given the sound condition of the banking industry, there were no community bank failures in 2018.
Our job now is to ensure that community banks continue to remain strong.
That requires bankers and supervisors alike to stay vigilant in the management and supervision of risks facing these institutions and the community bank model.
While banks are performing well and loan portfolios are growing, we want to ensure that loans are underwritten prudently.
We also want bankers to actively manage concentrations of credit risk, and be mindful that strong lending activity can strain liquidity.
We also continue to focus on concentrations of agricultural credit.
In an ongoing effort to understand the emerging risks related to agricultural lending, the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City facilitates a National Agricultural Credit meeting semiannually.
In late March of this year, the Federal Reserve will be hosting this meeting in Washington, D.C.
In April, the Board will meet with the Community Depository Institution Advisory Council.
I view meetings like these as important learning opportunities where I can hear directly from leaders in the field about the challenges and opportunities in community banking.
These meetings and direct lines of communication with community bankers help to inform one of the Board's primary goals of ensuring that both supervisory programs and regulations are appropriately tailored to the size, complexity, and risk of a financial institution.
The Federal Reserve and other federal banking agencies have demonstrated a commitment to reducing regulatory burden, especially on community banks, while maintaining safety and soundness.
In particular, the Federal Reserve has acted to implement provisions of S.
It is important for the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies to receive input directly from community bankers.
One of these important proposals is to implement the community bank leverage ratio.
While the community bank leverage ratio proposal would increase the minimum leverage ratio for banks that opt in to the new framework, the proposal would allow qualifying community banks to opt out of the more complicated risk-based capital framework.
Other proposals include raising to $400,000 the threshold for determining when an appraisal is required for a residential real estate transaction, and excluding community banks from the Volcker rule.
The Federal Reserve also acted to raise the asset threshold from $1 billion to $3 billion of total consolidated assets for the Small Bank Holding Company and Savings and Loan Holding Company Policy Statement.
This change allows more banking companies that have limited access to the capital markets to take advantage of using debt in bank acquisitions.
The change also exempts eligible small holding companies from consolidated risk-based capital rules, a significant burden reduction.
In December, the federal banking agencies issued a final rule allowing qualifying insured depository institutions with less than $3 billion in total assets to benefit from an extended 18-month on-site examination cycle.
This increases the former threshold of $1 billion and provides examination burden relief to a substantial number of community banks with relatively simple risk profiles.
With respect to supervision, the Federal Reserve continues to tailor and reduce burden by conducting portions of community bank examinations offsite.
However, we also understand the importance of face-to-face interaction and continue to be responsive to bankers' requests for on-site examinations.
The Federal Reserve has also implemented a risk-focused supervisory program--the Bank Exams Tailored to Risk (BETR) program--which aims to identify low-risk activities within state member banks and apply appropriately streamlined examination work programs to these activities, and conversely, to identify high-risk activities within state member banks for prompt supervisory attention.
This enhanced tailoring of supervision minimizes regulatory burden for the many community banks that are well managed, and directs supervisory resources to higher-risk activities where they are most needed to contain the risks that can result from aggressive banking strategies.
Similarly, the Federal Reserve tailors its supervision of holding companies based on the size, complexity, and risk profile of each institution.
As I conclude, I would emphasize how crucial it is to balance effective regulation and supervision to ensure the safety and soundness of community banks while also ensuring that undue burden does not constrain the capacity of these institutions to support the communities they serve.
As I previously noted, one of the most important aspects of my job, as I see it, is to have open lines of communication and feedback between regulators and community banks and bankers.
As a former community banker and state regulator, I understand how clear communication can help us all do our jobs better.
So, I encourage you--and everyone with a stake in this work--to share your thoughts on the impact of regulation on community banks and the communities they serve.
This dialogue is especially important as we continue to work to tailor our supervision and regulation to the size and risk profile of the institutions we oversee.
Although we have different responsibilities, I believe we can agree that we must keep our financial system strong, while maintaining the ability of community banks to fulfill their important role in our economy.

But first, I have a few thoughts about the vital work you do as economics educators and its connection to what the Federal Reserve is trying to accomplish.
I promise to be brief, because it is a school night.
I am here today, and the Fed has organized this event, because of the importance of economics education.
It is, of course, central to my current role as a monetary policymaker and financial regulator.
In government, economic analysis is one of the principal tools we use in making policy decisions.
It also underpins the countless decisions by consumers, businesses, and investors that drive economic activity.
For example, to continue to grow and succeed, any business owner should understand the differences between fixed cost, variable cost, average cost, and marginal cost.
Economics teaches us about the power of incentives, which are central to thinking about and understanding regulatory and tax policy.
Part of your students' success is their economic success as capable, creative, and productive members of the workforce and as consumers adept at managing their finances.
We all benefit when better-educated citizens support economic policies that help our nation prosper.
We all benefit from the capability, creativity, and productivity of our workforce, because nothing is more important to a healthy and growing economy.
Responsible consumers skilled in managing their finances are better prepared to weather bad times, and stronger household finances overall can help sustain economic growth and mitigate a downturn.
Stabilizing growth and mitigating a downturn, of course, are aspects of the Federal Reserve's mission.
Monetary policy can be a powerful tool to achieve these ends, but, in truth, its powers are dwarfed by larger forces, such as the productivity of the American people and the strength of their finances.
By educating students and supporting their future contributions to the economy as workers and consumers, all teachers, especially economics teachers, are furthering our goals at the Fed, so let me offer my further thanks for making our job easier.
To help support your work as teachers, the Federal Reserve Board and the 12 Reserve Banks conduct programs, organize events, and publish books to spread knowledge of economics, financial literacy, and the role of the Fed in promoting a healthy economy and financial system.
Each of the Reserve Banks has community outreach and educational initiatives, and the outreach to economics teachers is coordinated by the System Economic Education Group, which has been chaired by Princeton Williams.
The Federal Reserve is dedicated to promoting diversity in our ranks and in the economics profession, and FedEd and other programs across the Federal Reserve System have helped advance this goal by reaching many schools with significant numbers of minority students.

Inviting Participation: The Public's Role in Stress Testing's Next Chapter
To the Council for Economic Education, New York, New York
Thank you, Nan, for that kind introduction, and thank you to President Mester of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland for inviting me to speak this evening.
I am honored to be here and to support the mission that you and the Council for Economic Education have worked so hard to advance--that every student in America gets a strong, early start on their financial education.
Because so much of the language of finance is couched in terms of metrics and rationality, we often forget that finance is something we never do alone.
Tonight, I want to briefly discuss the role that participation plays in the Federal Reserve's work and outline one effort to solicit broad participation--an upcoming conference on stress tests, intended to make those tests more open, transparent, and effective.
Public institutions exist under a grant of trust from the people they serve, to pursue a specific policy goal.
The Federal Reserve System we know today emerged through decades of legislation, public consultation, and debate--from the original Federal Reserve Act, which created the Federal Reserve System, to the Banking Act of 1935,1 which established the modern Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), to the Treasury-Federal Reserve Accord of 1951 (PDF), which ensured the separation of monetary and fiscal policy.2 These changes made our economy and our country stronger, because they improved the Federal Reserve's ability to accomplish the mission Congress assigned it.
Throughout this evolution, a key principle has been that accountability allows the Federal Reserve to be independent--that we are subject to challenge, to counterargument, and to the emergence of new evidence and ideas.
Accountability is only one reason the Federal Reserve relies on public outreach and participation.
We also rely on participation for our effectiveness, because the best ideas in finance and economics can, and often do, come from a wide variety of sources.
Agencies like the Federal Reserve are a collection of expertise--informed by experience and positioned to turn a broad range of information into policy.
The Federal Reserve recognizes these limits, and the need to invite new ideas, through a variety of initiatives.
We seek out a qualified, diverse workforce, and foster an inclusive workplace.3 We meet frequently with a range of advisory councils, drawing on expertise in banking, modeling, and consumer and community finance.4 We have increased transparency around our policy process and issued new reports on financial stability and banking supervision and regulation, with new details about our work.5 And across the Federal Reserve System, our staff publishes a wide range of economic and policy research and plays an active role in academic discourse.
Monetary policy itself shows the value of participation and transparency.
monetary policy is the sole responsibility of the Federal Reserve.
Yet some of the most important innovations in the field have come from outside the Reserve System.
Since 1935, we have decided monetary policy by committee, a structure that has served us well because it is designed to capture different views of a wide and varied national economy.
And over the past several decades, the FOMC has greatly increased its own transparency--from postmeeting announcements, to announcing an objective for inflation, to a published survey of economic projections, to postmeeting press conferences (which will now take place after every FOMC meeting).6 As many of you know, over the course of 2019, we will be reviewing our monetary policy strategy, tools, and communication practices, and we will hold a research conference on the subject with outside speakers, as well as "Fed Listens" events at a number of Reserve Banks, to hear from a broad range of constituencies.
Supervisory stress tests offer an independent and valuable lens on the health of the banking system.
They offer us a forward-looking measurement of bank capital, a view of common and systemic risks across the banking sector, and a broader understanding of the health of the financial system.
Ten years have passed since the Federal Reserve conducted its first supervisory stress tests.
That initial experiment helped stabilize financial markets and shore up our banking system at a critical and uncertain time.
Our challenge now is to preserve the strength of the test, while improving its efficiency, transparency, and integration into the post-crisis regulatory framework.
To that end, the stress tests have not remained static.
Just in the past several days, the Board acted to suspend stress tests this year for lower-risk firms--generally, those with total assets between $100 billion and $250 billion.7 That move follows the passage of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act.8 The extended cycle provides administrative burden relief for these institutions and recognizes the different risks that they typically pose--especially compared to the largest and most complex firms, whose failure poses the greatest risk to the real economy.
Even with this change, the stress tests remain a core part of our supervision of these firms.
Improvements like these are necessary to ensure our supervisory framework evolves from its post-crisis origins to an effective steady state.
The question of how best to consolidate the gains from the first 10 years of stress testing deserves the attention and effort of the country's best minds.
We should welcome changes and novel ideas, even when they explore stress testing in a new and unfamiliar light.
In July, as a forum for such ideas, we will host a public conference focused on the transparency and effectiveness of stress testing.
Called Stress Testing: A Discussion and Review, the event will convene panel discussions, drawing on a mix of presenters with industry, academic, and regulatory backgrounds.
We expect the insights from the conference to inform the evolution of our stress-testing framework--and we hope to continue the conversation well after the conference ends.
Stress testing provides insight into a dynamic financial system, and our stress-testing process must be dynamic as well.
More broadly, the core of the Federal Reserve's independence is a broad consensus around the value and public worth of our mission.
The Federal Reserve is the steward and trustee of that mission, but the public is its owner.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Treasury and Federal Reserve Statements," Federal Reserve Bulletin 37 (March 1951): 237.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Diversity and Inclusion Strategic Plan 2016-19 (Washington: Board of Governors, December 2016).
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Advisory Councils" (January 25, 2019).
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Financial Stability Report (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, November 2018); Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Supervision and Regulation Report (Washington: Board of Governors, November 2018).
The FOMC's "Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy," first issued in January 2012 and reaffirmed each January, specifies that the Committee judges that inflation at the rate of 2 percent, as measured by the annual change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures, is most consistent over the longer run with the Federal Reserve's statutory mandate and that the Committee would be concerned if inflation were running persistently above or below this objective.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board releases scenarios for 2019 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) and Dodd-Frank Act stress test exercises," news release, February 5, 2018.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Interagency Statement Regarding the Impact of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA) (PDF)," news release, July 6, 2018.
Changes proposed as part of the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act have been proposed but not finalized.
Similarly, changes as part of the proposed "stress capital buffer" have been proposed but not finalized.
Both proposals will inform the final rule governing the methodology for capital distributions.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Invites Public Comment on Framework that Would More Closely Match Regulations for Large Banking Organizations with Their Risk Profiles," news release, October 31, 2018; Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board Seeks Comment on Proposal to Simplify Its Capital Rules for Large Banks while Preserving Strong Capital Levels that Would Maintain Their Ability to Lend Under Stressful Conditions," news release, April 10, 2018.

At "Research Symposium on the Community Reinvestment Act" hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Thank you all for participating in our Research Symposium on the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA).
At the Federal Reserve, we value the CRA as a critical tool for providing support to low- and moderate income (LMI) families and their communities.
And we are interested in strengthening the CRA as it encourages banks to help meet the credit needs of the communities they are chartered to serve.
Today's research forum is one part of an extensive outreach effort we are undertaking to gather the best ideas for improving implementation of the Community Reinvestment Act.
Over the past four months alone, all 12 of our Reserve Banks have hosted roundtables in locations around the country, from San Francisco to Boston, and from Rapid City to Puerto Rico.
The purpose is to hear ideas on improving the CRA regulations from the bankers and community groups that have a stake in the CRA's success.
In addition, we held two roundtables at the Federal Reserve Board earlier this week to gather perspectives from national organizations focused on policy topics, such as housing, small business lending, and consumer credit.2
We have asked our large and community bank advisory councils, the Federal Advisory Council and the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council, about their experiences with the CRA and suggestions for improvements.
At our most recent meeting with our Community Advisory Council, we asked for their recommendations for reform.3
Even though we decided not to join the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in the publication of its August 2018 Advance Notice of Proposed Rulemaking concerning revisions to the CRA regulations, we have been reviewing the approximately 1,500 comment letters submitted by academics, banks and banking trade associations, community and consumer groups, and citizens.
So what have we learned so far from the comment letters we have reviewed and the roundtables we have held? If there is one common thread, it is that support for the Community Reinvestment Act is broad and deep.
Commenters across the board applauded the significant volume of CRA loans and investments that have supported LMI households and communities, as well as the benefits households and communities have realized from the CRA's focus on local retail financial services, small business lending, and community development lending, investments, and services.
This is not a simple challenge, and this morning's panel identified some promising solutions to the challenge of modernizing the definition of assessment areas to keep up with changes in banks' business models.
I appreciated the panelists' insights on how to balance the importance of place with various business models, including to reflect the extensive use of digital channels and other changes in the banking industry.
We have heard general support for assessment areas that reflect each bank's business model, recognizing that branch-based assessment areas work for many banks but that additional or different assessment areas may be appropriate for others.
Third, we have received helpful input on tailoring CRA regulations to banks of different sizes and business models.
We also heard this at the regional roundtables, where banker participants ranged from small community banks to large internet-only banks.
Fourth, we have heard some good suggestions for ensuring that any modernization of assessment areas should keep in focus the goal of encouraging banks to seek out opportunities in underserved areas, including in this morning's panel on assessment areas.
The concern about CRA hotspots and credit deserts was echoed in the comment letters, and several commenters offered helpful suggestions for addressing this problem going forward.
And the need to create incentives for CRA capital to reach underserved communities was a theme we heard in our regional roundtables from both bankers and community groups.
Likewise, there is an openness to expanding the use of metrics that evaluate components of a bank's activity on an assessment area level, while recognizing the importance of also leveraging performance context information, including of a qualitative nature, so that bankers and examiners are able to identify and understand local community needs.
The first panel this morning on metrics and evaluating performance also helped further our understanding in this area, with particular focus on the investment behaviors of CRA-motivated banks and on how we might strengthen the CRA to better evaluate a bank's performance in meeting the credit needs of its communities.
Sixth, in both comment letters and roundtables, community and consumer groups emphasized the historical context of the CRA as it relates to redlining practices.
The central thrust of the CRA is to encourage banks to ensure that all creditworthy borrowers have fair access to credit, and, to do so successfully, it has long been recognized that they must guard against discriminatory or unfair and deceptive lending practices.
The Federal Reserve is a research-driven institution, and we want to be sure that we are aware of all the latest research on the effectiveness of the CRA and what the research has to say about potential regulatory improvements.
I have had opportunities to hear directly from stakeholders in a variety of settings, kicking off with a community development visit in Baltimore last April and most recently in Denver, at our first regional roundtable.4 The Denver roundtable was attended by state member banks and was hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.
Sitting around a table together provided an opportunity for me to hear community bankers reflect on what has worked well for their communities and what they see as challenges, and to provide thoughtful suggestions on what they think might work best going forward.
The best approach to implementing the CRA in today's environment is a complex issue, so I value hearing a wide range of suggestions.
In closing, I want to reiterate my own commitment to strengthening the CRA, which is widely shared across the Federal Reserve System.
We think that simplifying and clarifying the regulations while strengthening local community engagement will help us accomplish that goal.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
See Lael Brainard, "Community Development in Baltimore and A Few Observations on Community Reinvestment Act Modernization" (speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Baltimore Community Development Gathering, April 17, 2018); and "Community Investment in Denver" (speech at the Denver Branch of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, October 15, 2018).

I am very glad to be speaking to you here in New York, a city I lived and worked in for 30 years before joining the Federal Reserve Board in September.
My resolution, as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), is to work with my colleagues to implement a monetary policy that will sustain economic growth and maximum employment at levels consistent with our 2 percent inflation objective.1
As we begin 2019, the initial conditions for the real economy are favorable.
Through the first three quarters of last year, gross domestic product growth averaged 3.2 percent.
Private-sector forecasts as well as our Summary of Economic Projections indicate that, when the data for the fourth quarter are released, they will show the economy likely grew at 3 percent or perhaps a little faster in 2018 for the year as a whole.
If so, economic growth in 2018 would be the fastest annual growth rate recorded in 13 years.
In terms of the economic outlook, ongoing momentum heading into this year indicates that that above-trend growth is likely to continue in 2019.
If the economy continues to grow in 2019 along the lines that I expect, in July the current expansion will become the longest in recorded U.S.
The labor market remains healthy, with an unemployment rate near the lowest level recorded in 50 years and with average monthly job gains continuing to outpace the increases needed over the longer run to provide employment for new entrants to the labor force.
Moreover, the declines in the unemployment rate have been widespread across racial and ethnic minority groups, though gaps for African Americans and Hispanics relative to whites remain sizable.
At 3.9 percent, the overall unemployment rate is below the median of FOMC participants' estimates of its full employment level, u*, of 4.4 percent.
That said, the participants' median estimate of u* has been falling for several years as strong employment gains have not triggered a worrying rise in price inflation.
In a welcome development, nominal wage growth is picking up, with most measures now running around 3 percent on an annual basis.
And, for the past couple of years, wage gains have been notably faster for lower-income workers.2 Aggregate wage gains are broadly in line with productivity growth and our 2 percent inflation objective, and they are consistent with a labor market that is operating in the vicinity of full employment.
With regard to labor supply, we have had a pickup in labor force participation among prime-age workers (those 25 to 54 years old) that is, at least for now, boosting the supply side of the economy.
The participation rate of prime-age workers has risen about 1-1/2 percentage points over the past few years.
And participation in the job market may still have some further room to rise, as the prime-age participation rate is still a couple of percentage points below the levels that prevailed in the late 1990s, when the labor market was last this strong.
Price stability, of course, is the other leg of our dual mandate, and PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation over the past 12 months has been running close to our 2 percent objective.
That said, and notwithstanding strong economic growth and a low unemployment rate, inflation has surprised to the downside recently, and it is not yet clear that inflation has moved back to 2 percent on a sustainable basis.
Because expectations of future inflation are such an important determinant of actual inflation, central banks are as much in the business of anchoring inflation expectations as they are of managing actual inflation.
Longer-run inflation expectations, based on straight readings of inflation compensation from TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities), have drifted downward, although, when adjusted for term premiums and liquidity, they remain near 2 percent.
The University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers' measure of expected inflation over the next 5 to 10 years has been broadly stable but has edged down over the past few years and is now at the very lower end of the range that has prevailed historically.
Inflation expectations of professional forecasters have remained stable and consistent with our 2 percent objective.
At each future FOMC meeting, as I consider what, if any, adjustment to our policy stance is warranted to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives, I will closely monitor the incoming data on inflation expectations as well as actual inflation, among the broad range of real and financial indicators that I consult.
To me, it is important that any future policy decisions we may consider in 2019 be consistent with both pillars of our dual mandate.
I will also be monitoring closely the incoming data on labor supply and productivity.3 Not only has aggregate demand growth been robust, but so, too, has been the growth in realized aggregate supply.
Realized productivity growth over the past eight quarters has averaged 1.3 percent, which is up from the 0.7 percent average recorded between 2011 and 2016.
Strong growth supported by supply-side gains in hours worked and productivity is not inflationary, as the experience of 2018 confirms.
With labor supply and productivity growth in 2018 having surprised on the upside, some mean reversion in 2019 is not unreasonable to forecast.
But right now, that is just a forecast, and if the positive developments on the supply side of the economy continue in 2019, they would need to be factored into the inflation outlook and thus the appropriate settings for monetary policy.
As I have indicated previously, I believe we may have seen the bottom on the productivity slowdown, but how much of the recent welcome uptick in productivity growth can be sustained or extended is hard to judge at this point.
It will depend in part on how much business investment spending adds to the stock of capital in the economy.
We saw a welcome pickup in investment in the first half of last year, but growth of capital spending slowed notably in the third quarter and the manufacturing indexes from the Institute for Supply Management have softened, though other data are consistent with a rebound in business spending in the fourth quarter.
If a pickup in the growth of investment spending was realized and sustained, it would be expected to contribute to future productivity growth.
The December Decision and the Outlook for Monetary Policy in 2019
With a robust labor market and inflation running close to our 2 percent inflation objective, the Committee decided at its December meeting to raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent.4 That said, growth and growth prospects in other economies around the world have moderated somewhat in recent months, and overall financial conditions have tightened materially.
These recent developments in the global economy and financial markets represent crosswinds to the U.S.
If these crosswinds are sustained, appropriate forward-looking monetary policy should respond to keep the economy as close as possible to our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability.5 I will closely monitor the incoming data on these global economic and financial developments as, at each future FOMC meeting, I consider what adjustment to our monetary policy stance is warranted to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives.
With our December decision, the 2.5 percent upper limit of our target range for the federal funds rate is now equal to the lower end of the range of Committee participants' estimates of its longer-run equilibrium level, r*.
One defines r* as the level of the policy rate that, if sustained, would maintain full employment and price stability in the long run.
It is for this reason that, at this stage of the business cycle and with the economy operating close to our dual-mandate objectives, it will be especially important for our policy decisions to continue to be data dependent.
First, we need to base our policy decisions on what trends in the data tell us about where the economy is at the time of each meeting relative to our dual-mandate objectives for unemployment and inflation.
Second, we need to be data dependent by looking at a wide range of real and financial data that can provide information on where the economy is heading under appropriate policy, including the ultimate destination for u* and r*.
Over the past seven years, FOMC participants have continually revised down their estimates of long-run u* and r* as the unemployment rate fell and historically low policy rates did not trigger a surge in inflation and inflation expectations above target.
With inflation muted, I believe that the Committee can afford to be patient as we see how the data evolve in 2019 and as we assess what monetary policy stance is warranted to sustain strong growth and our dual-mandate objectives.
In terms of monetary policy implementation, the FOMC is assessing how the demand for our liabilities, especially reserve balances held at the Fed by depository institutions and U.S.
Ultimately, these factors, along with the choice we make with regard to our operating framework, will be the primary determinants of the size of our balance sheet, which since October 2017 has been shrinking as we allow our holdings of Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities to roll off as they mature and prepay.
There have been significant changes in financial regulation pertaining to high-quality liquid assets and liquidity coverage ratios, and the legacy of the Global Financial Crisis has likely led financial institutions to want to have higher liquidity even outside of regulation.
And that means that we are going to be in a world in which financial institutions are likely either required or going to want to hold onto liquid assets, including reserves at the Fed.
The FOMC is discussing the pros and cons of different longer-run approaches to monetary policy implementation and is still learning about the evolution of the demand for reserves in the banking system.
As noted in the FOMC's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, the Committee intends to, in the longer run, hold "no more securities than necessary to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively."7 In that vein, as indicated in the minutes from our recent meetings, the Committee has been weighing the costs and benefits of an implementation system with abundant reserves.
The current system for policy implementation with abundant reserves has, to date, served us well.
We have good control of short-term money market rates in a variety of market conditions, and these rates have been effectively transmitting to broader financial conditions in the economy.
However, while the assessment of our operating framework is ongoing, let me be clear that any decisions we make on the ultimate size of the balance sheet and the implementation of policy will be taken so as to be consistent with our goals of sustaining strong growth, maximum employment, and price stability.
If we find that the ongoing program of balance sheet normalization or any other aspect of normalization no longer promotes the achievement of our dual-mandate goals, we will not hesitate to make changes.
In November, the Federal Reserve announced that it will conduct a wide-ranging and public review in 2019 of how we go about achieving the twin goals of maximum employment and price stability assigned to us by the Congress.
The review will cover the Fed's monetary policy strategy, policy tools, and communication practices and will include outreach to businesses, community groups, academics, and other interested parties.
As Chairman Powell has indicated, with labor market conditions close to maximum employment and inflation near our 2 percent objective, now is a good time to take stock of how the Federal Reserve formulates, conducts, and communicates monetary policy.
As part of this outreach effort, the Federal Reserve System will hold a research conference June 4-5, 2019, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and featuring outside speakers and panelists.
The Federal Reserve Board and Reserve District Banks will also be holding outreach and public events as we seek views from a wide range of interested parties.
Beginning in the summer of 2019, the FOMC will draw on what it has learned from the conference and the System outreach events as it assesses possible ways in which the Fed's strategy, tools, and communication practices might evolve to best achieve, on a sustained basis, the twin goals of maximum employment and price stability assigned to it by the Congress.
economy enters 2019 after a year of strong growth, with inflation near our 2 percent objective, and with the unemployment rate near 50-year lows.
That said, growth and growth prospects in other economies around the world have moderated somewhat in recent months, and overall financial conditions have tightened materially.
These recent developments in the global economy and financial markets represent crosswinds to the U.S.
If these crosswinds are sustained, appropriate forward‑looking monetary policy should seek to offset them to keep the economy as close as possible to our dual-mandate objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
As we have long said, monetary policy is not on a preset course.
Going forward, we need, I believe, to be cognizant of the balance we must strike between (1) being forward looking and preemptive and (2) maximizing the odds of being right.
Speaking for myself, I believe we can afford to be patient about assessing how to adjust our policy stance to achieve and sustain our dual-mandate objectives.
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or FOMC participants.
Wage gains for workers with different wage levels can be calculated using data from the Current Population Survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The Economic Policy Institute provides convenient tabulations of these data.
For data through 2017, see Economic Policy Institute (2018), State of Working America Data Library (Washington: EPI, March), table ("Wages by Percentile").
For an update through the first half of 2018, see Elise Gould and Heidi Shierholz (2018), "Average Wage Growth Continues to Flatline in 2018, While Low-Wage Workers and Those with Relatively Lower Levels of Educational Attainment See Stronger Gains," Economic Policy Institute, Working Economics Blog, July 18.
For an analysis of the effect of a positive boost to productivity in the FRB/US model, see Jean-Philippe Laforte (2018), "Overview of the Changes to the FRB/US Model (2018)," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 7), fig.
In the model, higher productivity lowers inflation, which calls for a flatter path for policy normalization than would otherwise be the case.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 19.
In the model of optimal monetary policy discussed in a paper by Clarida, Galí, and Gertler, the central bank is able to offset fully exogenous declines in aggregate demand through adjustments in the expected path for the policy rate.
Clarida, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999), "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective," Journal of Economic Literature, vol.
A paper by Clarida shows that this result extends to the open economy facing, for example, a decline in exports.
While monetary policy in practice must confront real-world complications that theoretical models ignore, the crucial point is that economic projections for growth and inflation under appropriate monetary policy may be much less affected by adverse or positive "demand" fluctuations than would be the case if policy did not respond appropriately to these developments.
That is, under present circumstances and under appropriate monetary policy, one can be more optimistic about the economic outlook than would be a "pessimist" who focuses only on the crosswinds without factoring in the appropriate policy response to the crosswinds.
Clarida (2017), "The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some Implications for Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordination," NBER Working Paper Series 23562 (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, June).
Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Clearing House and the Bank Policy Institute Annual Conference, New York, November 27.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement on Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, September 17, paragraph 9.

Insurers occupy a meaningful role in the financial sector, meeting the financial needs of consumers and businesses with a distinct business model that calls for appropriately tailored policies.
As you know, the Federal Reserve has a role as consolidated supervisor of some insurers, a role we continually strive to fulfill in the most appropriate and tailored manner.
The Federal Reserve also participates as a member of "Team USA"--together with the state insurance supervisors, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC), and the Federal Insurance Office (FIO)--in the international insurance standard-setting process, including the ongoing development of an insurance capital standard (ICS) for internationally active insurance groups.
In the hope of providing greater transparency, I will also provide some updates on the Board's forthcoming proposal on insurance holding company capital requirements, often referred to as the Building Block Approach (BBA).
insurance market, the largest in the world, generated over $2 trillion of direct written premium in 2017, over 10 percent of the total U.S.
gross domestic product for that year and the highest direct premium volume in the years following the financial crisis.1 Over a quarter of that premium came from life insurers,2 including, of course, the institutions represented in this room.
In addition to its role providing insurance products--taking on risk and enabling policyholders to plan financially--the insurance industry plays an immensely important role through its investments.
In 2017, nearly 65 percent of the insurance industry's $6.5 trillion in cash and invested assets was from the life insurance industry.3 Over 70 percent of life insurers' invested assets were held in bonds,4 including corporate bonds, which fuel growth in the real economy.
This has served both the industry and the economy well.5
In the years since the financial crisis, the insurance industry has shown resilience, with capital and surplus increasing at an average annual growth rate of 4.1 percent since 2007.6 With an approach to investment and financial management that focuses on the long-term, the U.S.
insurance industry continues to play a valued role in the financial sector.
Now in its eighth year of having a supervisory role over certain insurers, the Federal Reserve continues to thoughtfully approach its mandates and authority.
The Dodd-Frank Act gave the Federal Reserve regulatory responsibilities for insurance holding companies that choose to own a federally insured depository institution and those designated by the Financial Stability Oversight Council.
The insurance thrift holding companies supervised by the Federal Reserve represent just under 10 percent of U.S.
insurance industry assets and span a wide range of sizes, structures, and business activities.7 With a core focus on ensuring the safety and soundness of the supervised insurance institutions, and protecting their subsidiary depository institutions, the Board aims to continue fulfilling its role as consolidated supervisor by tailoring its oversight to the insurance business of the supervised firms, complementing the existing work of state insurance supervisors.
The Federal Reserve has aimed to develop policies that are insurance-centric and appropriate for insurance risks.
For instance, the Board's advance notice of proposed rulemaking (ANPR) on insurance capital requirements set out two frameworks for capital standards that are each unlike the Board's capital rules for bank holding companies.8 The BBA, as set out in the ANPR, was fashioned as a framework that builds upon the regulatory capital rules of subsidiaries' functional regulators--state or foreign insurance regulators for insurance subsidiaries and federal banking regulators for insured depository institutions--to provide a consolidated capital requirement.
The Board's Approach to a Capital Standard for Insurance Holding Companies
We favored an approach that is as standardized as possible, rather than relying on internal capital models of supervised firms, in order to promote transparency and facilitate comparability across firms.
We also aimed to strike an efficient balance between simplicity and risk sensitivity in order to ensure accurate reflection of risks while minimizing regulatory burden.
To further limit regulatory burden, the Board envisioned a BBA that would rely upon existing U.S.
At the outset, we decided against applying the Board's bank holding company capital rules to supervised insurance firms at the enterprise level, in light of the very different business models of insurance and banking.
We considered that a capital approach akin to the European Solvency II framework would not adequately incorporate U.S.
Volatility in a valuation approach that is used in a capital standard can especially affect long-term contracts, with the potential for unintended consequences on the ability of insurers to provide long-term life insurance and retirement planning products.
Moreover, use of an approach that entails more reliance on internal models could undermine our desire for consistent, cross-firm comparisons and can lack transparency to market participants and supervisors.
This may not be optimal for the United States insurance market.
Importantly, the BBA will appropriately reflect, rather than unduly penalize, long duration liabilities in the United States, facilitating the continued robustness of product availability in the U.S.
In the U.S., an aggregation-based approach like the BBA could also strike a better balance between entity-level, and enterprise-wide, supervision of insurance firms.
Having spoken enough about what the proposed BBA is not, I should spend some time previewing what it is, and I suspect there is some interest in this room about that topic.
The proposed BBA is an approach to a consolidated capital requirement that considers all material risks within the enterprise by aggregating the capital positions of companies under an insurance holding company, after making some adjustments and scaling them to a common capital regime.
To streamline implementation burden while reflecting all material risks, I think it would make sense to use the NAIC's insurance capital framework as the common capital regime.
As the name implies, the BBA constructs "building blocks"--or groupings of entities in the supervised firm--that are covered under the same capital regime.
These building blocks are then used to calculate combined, enterprise-level capital resources and requirements.
In each building block, the BBA generally applies the capital regime for that block to the subsidiaries in that block.
For instance, in a life insurance building block, subsidiaries within this block would be treated in the BBA the way they would be treated under life insurance capital requirements.
In a depository institution building block, subsidiaries would be subject to bank regulatory capital requirements.
The financial crisis taught us that certain activities in an insurance enterprise--for instance, derivatives activity--could pose risks to the enterprise that may not always be reflected through affiliates subject to capital regimes.
To address regulatory gaps and arbitrage risks, like those made manifest in the financial crisis, the BBA generally would apply bank regulatory capital requirements to nonbank/non-insurance building blocks.
Once the enterprise's entities are grouped into building blocks, and capital resources and requirements are computed for each building block, the enterprise's capital position is produced by generally adding up the capital positions of each building block.
In order for the BBA's aggregation to function appropriately, and to reflect the Board's supervisory objectives, the BBA needs to make certain adjustments to the building blocks.
For instance, to compare similar activities across building blocks, the BBA would apply insurance capital rules consistently, without regard to permitted accounting practices granted by an individual state, thus uniformly applying statutory accounting principles as set forth by the NAIC.
Other areas where adjustments would be made include provisions to comply with the Collins Amendment of the Dodd-Frank Act9--for instance, allowing only instruments meeting the criteria under the Board's bank capital rules to qualify as capital for an insurance holding company--and technical adjustments.
Aggregation requires a further step after adjustments are applied to each building block, a step that is frequently termed "scaling." Two building blocks under two different capital regimes cannot simply be added together if, as is frequently the case, each regime has a different scale for its ratios and thresholds.
The BBA proposes to scale and equate capital positions in different regimes through analyzing historical defaults under those regimes.
Once the insurance holding company's aggregate capital position is calculated, the BBA would impose a minimum requirement that is calibrated to be consistent with the Board's role to ensure that the risks of the enterprise do not present undue risk to the safety and soundness of the depository institution.
Our goal with the BBA is to capture all material risk of each supervised organization, leverage existing legal-entity standards, and minimize burden.
In developing the BBA, we have been mindful of the role that the insurance industry plays through its buy-and-hold, long-term approach to investments.
A capital standard that uses market-based valuation can introduce volatility and procyclicality, and one that is excessively volatile or procyclical can influence a firm to veer away from a long-term perspective and concentrate instead on the short term.
In contrast, a capital standard that is stable in its valuation, conservative in its design, and appropriately reflective of financial soundness can influence firms to plan for the long term, consistent with the nature of life insurance and retirement products, and similarly invest for the long term through assets like government and municipal bonds, corporate bonds, and infrastructure.
Moreover, a capital standard like the BBA that largely builds on state-based insurance capital standards would tend to reinforce, rather than frustrate, the important role that insurers' investments play in our economy.
In developing the BBA, we also have been mindful of the potential interaction with the valuable work of another Team USA member, the NAIC, to develop its Group Capital Calculation (GCC).
We also applaud the NAIC's efforts to address life insurers' potential liquidity risks and develop a liquidity stress testing framework for large life insurers through the NAIC's Macro Prudential Initiative.
It is just good policy for the authorities that mutually supervise firms to coordinate efforts in order to streamline, seek harmony, and minimize inconsistencies.
To that end, in August of 2017, the Federal Reserve initiated contact with the NAIC and state insurance supervisors to engage in dialogue with the aim of achieving consistency, wherever possible, between the two capital frameworks under development.
Input from the NAIC and the states has helped identify areas of commonality while remaining respectful of the somewhat different objectives of the relevant supervisory bodies and legal environments.
The Board's capital standard also must comport with federal law for insurance holding companies with depository institution subsidiaries, while the NAIC's GCC interfaces primarily with state laws.
Moreover, because of the characteristics of the current population of insurance thrift holding companies, the BBA currently would only need to scale between two regimes: the NAIC's insurance risk-based capital regime and federal bank capital rules.
By contrast, the firms to which the GCC may apply can encompass operations in a number of non-U.S.
Likewise, to be transparent, gather additional input, and provide a valuable test of our approach, the Federal Reserve intends to conduct a quantitative impact study of the BBA as part of our rulemaking process.
We hope supervised firms will take advantage of this opportunity to contribute valuable information and feedback on our approach.
Moreover, this engagement has been helpful for Team USA's efforts in the international insurance standard-setting arena.
It is our intent that the Federal Reserve's development of the BBA, together with the NAIC's development of the GCC, will assist with Team USA's advocacy of an aggregation method that can be deemed comparable to the ICS.
In 2013, through the Federal Reserve's role as consolidated supervisor of certain insurers, we joined the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), strengthening our collaboration with the other members of Team USA that continues to this day.
The standards produced through the IAIS are, of course, not binding upon the United States.
However, it remains in our national interest to engage in the international insurance standards-development process so that it produces standards that are appropriate for the U.S.
I see this philosophy as being important not only in the Federal Reserve's engagement in the IAIS, but also with the broader Financial Stability Board.
In order for any form of an ICS to be implementable globally, it needs to be suitable for the U.S.
The current core proposal in the ICS would face implementation challenges in the United States.
For instance, such a framework may fail to adequately account for U.S.
Among other things, this motivates our advocacy of an aggregation alternative, and the use of an alternative valuation method that derives from U.S.
Furthermore, we support the collection of information on an aggregation-based approach that would reside within the ICS, and actively participate, together with other jurisdictions that espouse aggregation-based approaches, in the development of such an approach for the ICS.
Additionally, we will continue to advocate for international insurance standards that promote a global level playing field and work well for the U.S.
Federal Insurance Office, Department of the Treasury, Annual Report on the Insurance Industry (PDF) (September 2018), 65-70; see, for example, National Association of Insurance Commissioners, State Insurance Regulation: Key Facts and Market Trends (PDF) (2018), 4.
See also Bureau of Economic Analysis, "Gross Domestic Product, Third Quarter 2018 (Advance Estimate) (PDF)," news release, October 26, 2018, 9.
FIO 2018 Annual Report, 65-70; see, for example, NAIC 2018 Key Facts and Market Trends, 4.
National Association of Insurance Commissioners, Capital Markets Special Report, "U.S.
Rosen, "The Life Insurance Industry and Systemic Risk: A Bond Market Perspective," Working Paper 2016-04 (Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, March 2016), 9-17.
Capital Requirements for Supervised Institutions Significantly Engaged in Insurance Activities, 81 Fed.
The so-called Collins Amendment (Section 171) of the Dodd-Frank Act requires, among other things, that the Board establish consolidated, minimum risk-based capital requirements that are not less than the current generally applicable capital requirements for insured depository institutions nor quantitatively lower than the generally applicable capital requirements for these institutions in effect at the time of the Dodd‑Frank Act's enactment.
A 2014 amendment to this provision set out that, in applying these minimum capital requirements, the Board is not required to include a person regulated by a state insurance regulator or a regulated foreign subsidiary or affiliate of such person engaged in the business of insurance.

Financial stability is integral to achieving the Federal Reserve's objectives of full employment and price stability.
Since then, financial sector resilience has strengthened, and household balance sheets have been repaired over the course of a lengthy recovery.
Today employment is strong, inflation is around target, and incomes are growing.1
If we learned anything from this experience, it is that we must be especially vigilant to safeguard the resilience of our financial system in good times when vulnerabilities may be building.
That is why the Federal Reserve actively monitors the potential vulnerabilities to the financial system.
Last week, for the first time, we released our assessment in the Financial Stability Report.2 Today I will offer a brief summary of the outlook, highlight areas where I see financial imbalances building, and touch on the implications for policy.
Domestic economic momentum has been strong, as evidenced by the labor market.
With the November data, monthly payroll gains have averaged 170,000 over the past 3 months, well above the pace necessary to absorb new entrants into the labor force.
By most measures, wages have accelerated over the past year and are now growing around 3 percent, the highest level since the crisis.
While the most recent reading on core personal consumption expenditures, or PCE, inflation ticked down, indicators of underlying trend inflation remain encouraging overall, providing little signal of an outbreak of inflation to the upside, on the one hand, and reassurance that underlying trend inflation may be close to our target of 2 percent, on the other (figure 1).
The economy has grown 3 percent over the past year, and there are good reasons to expect growth to remain solid next year, supported by the strong underlying momentum in domestic demand.
Consumer spending looks to be robust going into the fourth quarter, and ongoing gains in income and employment provide positive fundamentals.
Sizable fiscal stimulus has provided an important boost to demand this year and will likely contribute somewhat further next year, given the usual lags in outlays and in the effects of tax cuts on business and household spending.
The most likely path for the economy is positive, although some tailwinds that have provided a boost are fading, and we may face some crosscurrents.
The global growth that provided a strong tailwind going into this year has moderated.
The earlier strong growth in Europe and Japan appears to be softening toward trend.
China is shifting to an accommodative policy stance to contend with a challenging trade environment and lagged effects from its earlier tightening.
Here at home, the impetus to growth from fiscal policy is likely to fade going into 2020.
Financial conditions are still supportive of growth by many measures (figure 2), but less so than last year.
In Europe, there are risks associated with deliberations over Italy's fiscal and debt trajectory and the United Kingdom's deliberations on the Brexit deal.
Here at home, we hear from businesses that the uncertainty associated with trade policy and the implications for supply chains may weigh on business capital spending.
Although it is reasonable to expect fiscal spending to be extended around current levels in real terms after the Bipartisan Budget Act expires, we cannot rule out that fiscal policy could become a headwind in 2020.
At 3.7 percent, the unemployment rate is at its lowest level in 49 years, and payrolls have been growing well above the pace that is consistent with labor market stabilization.
Historically, the few periods when resource utilization has been similarly tight have seen elevated risks of either accelerating inflation or financial imbalances.
Our goal now is to sustain the expansion by maintaining the economy around full employment and inflation around target.
The gradual path of increases in the federal funds rate has served us well by giving us time to assess the effects of policy as we have proceeded.
That approach remains appropriate in the near term, although the policy path increasingly will depend on how the outlook evolves.
In contrast to the past, the Federal Reserve now has a systematic forward-looking approach to identifying increases in financial vulnerabilities.
This monitoring is the focus of regular Federal Reserve Board and Federal Open Market Committee discussions.
Last week, the Board released its first Financial Stability Report to help inform the public and promote transparency and accountability as we carry out our financial stability responsibilities.
While there has been substantial progress on reducing household debt burdens and increasing the resilience of the banking system, the Federal Reserve's assessment suggests that financial vulnerabilities associated with corporate debt are building against a backdrop of elevated risk appetite.
In contrast to the years preceding the crisis, when household borrowing was growing at a pace far above that of gross domestic product (GDP), it has since come down and is now growing more slowly than the economy overall (figure 3).
Moreover, while much of the increase before the crisis reflected borrowing that proved unsustainable, more recent borrowing has been concentrated among households with strong credit profiles.
Large banks have increased both the size and quality of their capital buffers: The ratio of common equity to risk-weighted assets at large banks has increased by half relative to the pre-crisis average.
It is now close to levels seen at smaller banks, although the risk-weighted capital ratio at large banks has moved down somewhat over the past year (figure 4).
In addition, insurers appear generally well capitalized; broker-dealers, including those not affiliated with large bank holding companies, have reduced their leverage; and the outstanding values of funding vehicles that embed significant leverage, such as certain securitized products, are much lower.
Financial reform has reduced funding risks associated with banks and money market funds.
Large banks subject to liquidity regulation rely less on unstable short-term wholesale funding and have thicker liquidity buffers.
As a result of money market reforms, investors have migrated toward government-only funds, which pose low run risk, and away from prime institutional funds, which proved highly susceptible to runs during the crisis and required extraordinary government support (figure 5).
The run-up in corporate debt has brought the ratio of debt to assets close to its highest level in two decades on an overall basis, and this is also true for speculative-grade and unrated firms (figure 7).
And whereas previously, mostly high-earning firms with relatively low leverage were taking on additional debt, analysis of detailed balance sheet information indicates that, over the past year, firms with high leverage, high interest expense ratios, and low earnings and cash holdings have been increasing their debt loads the most.
Historically, high leverage has been linked to elevated financial distress and retrenchment by businesses in economic downturns.
Credit quality has deteriorated within the investment-grade segment, where the share of bonds rated at the lowest investment-grade level has reached near-record levels.
In an economic downturn, widespread downgrades of these low-rated investment-grade bonds to speculative-grade ratings could induce some investors to sell them rapidly--for instance, because lower-rated bonds have higher regulatory capital requirements or because bond funds have limits on the share of non-investment-grade bonds they hold.
These funds now hold about one-tenth of the corporate bond market, and the redemption behavior of investors in these funds during a market correction is unclear.
Bond sales could lead to large changes in bond prices and overall financial conditions if technological, market, or regulatory factors contribute to strains on market liquidity--a possibility that has been relatively untested over the course of the expansion.
Further down the credit quality ladder, there has been sizable growth in leveraged lending, accompanied by a notable deterioration in underwriting standards.
While leveraged loans have traditionally had important investor protections, loan covenants for new leveraged loans have weakened dramatically.
Deals increasingly involve features that increase opacity and risk, such as less subordinated debt; "EBITDA (earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation, and amortization) add backs," which could inflate the projected capacity of the borrowers to repay their loans; and "incremental facilities," which allow additional borrowing that is of equal seniority with the existing bank loan.5 The share of newly issued large loans to corporations with high leverage (debt to EBITDA ratios above 6) now exceeds previous peak levels observed in 2007 and 2014 (figure 8).
The widening adoption of practices that make risk harder to measure suggests a heightened focus on industry risk-management practices is warranted.6
Many large banks are engaged in the origination of leveraged loans with an intent to distribute, often to CLOs.
The originate-to-distribute model exposes banks to pipeline risk--the risk that some originated loans may be difficult to distribute if market conditions deteriorate.
Although banks have improved pipeline management over the past decade, risk-management practices may have weakened somewhat recently in the face of strong investor demand.
But there are also indirect exposures, including through bank investments in CLOs on the order of $90 billion, that bear vigilance.
More broadly, bank lines to the nonbank financial sector have increased notably (figure 9).
Loan funds have also become increasingly important in the leveraged loan market and are estimated to purchase about one-fifth of newly originated leveraged loans.
To date, the default rate on leveraged loans has been at the low end of its historical range, and corporate credit conditions have been favorable, with low interest expenses and low expected default rates.
However, if spreads rise sharply or economic conditions deteriorate significantly, we could see downgrades, refinancing challenges, rising delinquencies and defaults, and losses to investors.
Even with the recent volatility in equity markets and the recent widening of corporate bond spreads, a range of asset prices remain high relative to historical benchmarks.
In particular, yields on high-yield corporate bonds relative to Treasury securities remain somewhat narrow on a historical basis despite recent increases.
The generally high appetite for risk that we saw over the past two years makes the equity, corporate debt, and other asset markets more vulnerable to swings in market sentiment.
In addition to generating losses for investors, declines in valuations could make it more challenging for firms to obtain or extend financing--especially among risky, indebted firms--which in turn could be amplified by the high levels of risky corporate debt.
The assessment of financial vulnerabilities that I have outlined naturally raises the following question for policymakers: What is the appropriate risk tolerance? It goes without saying we must take all appropriate steps to prevent another Great Financial Crisis from causing the greatest contraction in global economic activity since the Great Depression.
But it is also worth remembering that financial imbalances played a key role in each of the past three U.S.
This suggests policy might seek to moderate financial vulnerabilities when they are likely to materially exacerbate an economic downturn, leading to deeper declines in output and higher levels of unemployment.
recessions featured important financial imbalances, although they differed in important ways.
Both economic theory and econometric evidence point to the risk that excesses in corporate debt markets could similarly amplify adverse shocks and contribute to job losses.8 The economics are straightforward.
Over-indebted businesses may face payment strains when earnings fall unexpectedly, and they may respond by pulling back on employment and investment.
In turn, business losses accumulate, and delinquencies and defaults rise, reducing the willingness or the ability of banks to lend.
Given the risks to the financial system and economy from this potential adverse feedback loop, a strong case can be made that the financial system's buffers should be fortified when the economy is strong.
Reinforcing capital buffers during the strong part of the cycle means that banks will have a cushion to absorb losses and remain sound during a subsequent downturn.
Thicker capital buffers help bolster the confidence of market participants when conditions deteriorate, helping prevent the downward spiral from a loss of confidence.
And during the downturn, that extra buffer can be released to enable banks to continue lending and help mitigate its severity.
History suggests that we should not expect the market to provide incentives for banks to build the necessary buffers when times are good; the essence of the cycle is that market sentiment become overconfident precisely when risk is actually highest.
One of the roles for independent regulatory bodies such as the Federal Reserve is to serve as a counterweight.
Moreover, as we saw in the last crisis, it is much costlier to rebuild capital in a downturn when earnings and risk appetite are low than to build buffers in an expansion when earnings are strong.
At the Federal Reserve, the two important tools that can respond somewhat to rising vulnerabilities are the design of stress-test scenarios and the countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB).
The annual supervisory stress test examines the resilience of large bank holding companies to a severely adverse scenario, which includes salient risks that can be adjusted over time.
In recent years, the scenarios have been designed to explore severe dislocations in corporate credit markets as a salient risk.
Nonetheless, the stress tests have limitations as a countercyclical tool during buoyant periods.
For instance, while the severity of the stresses can be varied from year to year to address emerging risks to some degree, it is difficult to introduce entirely new scenarios each year to target specific sectoral risks without introducing excessive complexity.10 And while the stress tests and proposed stress capital buffer are designed to calibrate capital buffers for the riskiness of an institution's particular assets and exposures, the capital buffer does not vary systematically to counter the cyclicality that arises through elevated asset valuations and other channels.11 The limited ability of the stress tests to increase loss-absorbing capacity during buoyant economic times is illustrated in the results from recent years, where scenarios have involved increasingly severe recessions and strains in corporate debt markets but generally lower declines in capital ratios.
More broadly, capital ratios at the largest banks have been flat and, more recently, modestly lower.
In contrast, the first goal of the CCyB is to directly build resilience at large bank holding companies when there is an elevated risk of above-normal losses, which often follow periods of credit growth or rapid asset price appreciation.
The second goal of the CCyB is to promote a more sustainable supply of credit over the economic cycle.
The CCyB is expected to be reduced as credit growth slows in order to support credit supply at times when it might otherwise contract.
There are several potential advantages to building additional resilience through the CCyB.
First, countercyclical capital requirements are intended to lean against rising risks at a time when the degree of monetary tightening needed to achieve the same goal could be inconsistent with sustaining the expansion.
Second, the banks that are subject to the CCyB could achieve a modest buffer simply by safeguarding the capital they have built up or by reducing payouts moderately.
It does not single out shortfalls in particular banks or result in hard-to-predict volatility in individual banks' stressed capital requirements.
Finally and critically, the additional capital implied by the CCyB across the system can be released when conditions deteriorate to ensure the ability of large banks to lend into a downturn.
Our job now is to sustain the expansion by maintaining the economy around full employment and inflation near target.
If history is any guide, as resource utilization continues to tighten, there is some risk that financial imbalances could grow.
financial system is much more resilient than before the crisis, owing importantly to strong financial reforms.
Even so, the banking system's core capital and liquidity buffers have yet to be tested through a full cycle.
At the same time, the appetite for risk among financial market participants rose notably over 2017 and much of 2018, and corporate borrowing has reached new heights amid rapid growth and deteriorating underwriting standards in riskier segments, such as leveraged lending.
The mutual funds that have built up exposure to some of this risky debt have liquidity mismatches that could contribute to market dislocations in stressed conditions.
At a time when cyclical pressures have been building and bank profitability has been strong, it might be prudent to ask large banking organizations to fortify their capital buffers, which could subsequently be released if conditions warrant.
"Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations," American Economic Review, vol.
"Federal Reserve Board Issues Final Policy Statement for Developing Scenarios for Future Capital Planning and Stress Testing Exercises," press release, November 7.
"Regulatory Capital Rules: The Federal Reserve Board's Framework for Implementing the U.S.
Basel III Countercyclical Capital Buffer (PDF)," final policy statement, September 8.
"The Federal Reserve's Financial Stability Agenda," speech delivered at the Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Brookings Institution, Washington, December 3.
"An Update on the Federal Reserve's Financial Stability Agenda," speech delivered at the Center for Global Economy and Business, Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, April 3.
"Safeguarding Financial Resilience through the Cycle," speech delivered at the Global Finance Forum, Washington, April 19.
Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, National Risk Committee (2018).
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
In addition to the discussion of vulnerabilities presented in the Board's Financial Stability Report, the increase in risks associated with nonfinancial corporate borrowing is highlighted in the fall 2018 report Semiannual Risk Perspective, produced by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency.
The estimate of about $1 trillion in the Board's Financial Stability Report excludes lending to financial companies and generally excludes loan commitments by banks.
The S&P Global Leveraged Loan Index is around $1.3 trillion.
The estimate of $2.2 trillion in the Bank of England's Financial Stability Report is for the global market, including bank loans.
For a recent discussion of developments informed by the Federal Reserve's supervisory work, particularly through its review of the Shared National Credit program, see Vermilyea (2018).
For a recent comparison of the subprime mortgage market and the global market for leveraged loans, see Bank of England (2018).
For example, López-Salido, Stein, and Zakrajšek (2017) present empirical evidence linking corporate debt excesses to contractions in U.S.
For a discussion of the Federal Reserve's framework for designing scenarios, see Board of Governors (2013).
See Board of Governors (2016) and Brainard (2018a and 2018b).


All of you who work in these roles are doing your country a great service by helping to advance economic opportunity in our communities.
I am happy to report that our economy is currently performing very well overall, with strong job creation and gradually rising wages.
The unemployment rate is 3.7 percent, the lowest since 1969.
A strong job market has encouraged more people to participate in the labor market, another positive development.
In fact, by many national-level measures, our labor market is very strong.
As those at this conference are acutely aware, however, aggregate statistics can mask important variations between different demographic and income groups, as well as significant regional differences.
For example, unemployment rates in some persistently poor rural counties remain much higher than the national figures.
The annual average unemployment rate in 2017 exceeded 10 percent in 27 persistently poor rural counties, and the rate was 20 percent or more in 2 of those counties.
Recent Fed research found that, since 2007, labor force participation rates for those in their prime working years in rural areas have increasingly lagged rates in urban areas.
Labor force participation has been particularly low for those with only a high school diploma or less.1 Research has also found that business formation and employment growth during the recovery have been concentrated in large urban areas.2 Data and research findings like these remind us that, despite positive trends in national data, the benefits of the ongoing economic expansion are still not reaching some communities.
Through the Fed's 12 Reserve Banks and their branches, we are able to get a clearer picture of conditions in individual communities across the nation.
Each of the Reserve Banks has an active, well-staffed community development function--one of the great benefits of the Federal Reserve's structure.
We get important and timely information on the state of local economic and financial conditions, including those affecting low- and moderate-income, as well as other underserved, communities.
Our community development staff provide us with a more nuanced understanding of current economic and financial conditions.
The first initiative is the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
These forums help to build awareness of promising tools and strategies for community and economic development.
A second example is the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas's commitment to advancing digital inclusion in low-income rural communities.
Despite significant effort and advances made by public, private, and nonprofit organizations in recent years, nearly 30 percent of rural households continue to lack access to broadband internet service.
To address this problem, the Dallas Fed has explored the role of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) in addressing the digital divide, the potential for technology to bridge the urban-rural divide in access to health care, and the critical importance of preparing workers for the digital economy.4
Third and last, community development staff at the Federal Reserve Board and several Reserve Banks have conducted research to better understand housing affordability challenges affecting rural communities nationwide, recognizing the importance of sufficient affordable housing to a community's economic vitality.
Fortunately, our staff also highlighted promising policy and practice solutions that have been implemented in some communities to try to address these challenges, including the establishment of dedicated funding for affordable housing and the elimination of exclusionary land use and zoning policies.5
While this type of research and community engagement work is a central component of our efforts to support rural areas, we also know that communities need resources and dedicated local partners to help implement many of the strategies involved.
CRA has been an important tool for strengthening local community and economic development infrastructure since it was enacted in 1977.
We also recognize that significant changes in the financial services industry since then have hindered the law's effectiveness, especially in rural communities, and that an update of the implementing regulations is appropriate.
As my colleague Governor Brainard has noted, one of the principles guiding our CRA modernization work is that any redesign of CRA regulations should continue to encourage banks to seek opportunities in underserved areas, including rural communities.
In closing, while the economy is strong overall, we recognize that some communities have yet to feel the full benefits of the ongoing expansion.
Alison Weingarden (2017), "Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-Metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25).
See, for example, Economic Innovation Group (2016), The New Map of Economic Growth and Recovery (Washington: EIG, May).
For example, see Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas (2016), Closing the Digital Divide: A Framework for Meeting CRA Obligations (PDF) (Dallas: FRB Dallas, July, rev.
For example, see Ann Carpenter, Douglas White, and Mary Hirt (2018), "Rental Housing Affordability in the Southeast: Data from the Sixth District," Community and Economic Development Discussion Paper 2‑18 (Atlanta: Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, July); and Andrew Dumont (2018), "Rural Affordable Rental Housing: Quantifying Need, Reviewing Recent Federal Support, and Assessing the Use of Low Income Housing Tax Credits in Rural Areas (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-077.
(Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).

Banks as Vital Infrastructure for Rural Communities of the West
At the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, California
It's a pleasure to be here at Stanford, an honor to be invited to speak by SIEPR and the Bill Lane Center--two institutions for which I have long had fondness and respect--and a great luxury to have the chance to talk for an hour with a group of people who share my love for a part of the world we call the West.
Most of my day job enmeshes me, of necessity, in either broad systemic questions of global financial stability or the impossibly arcane minutiae of our convoluted and labyrinthine financial regulatory system.
Both of those are perfectly worthy occupations but inescapably require a relentlessly global outlook.
Yet my first intellectual passion as a very young man was for the history and life of a specific part of the world--the Western United States, as place and idea.
We all know that throughout the history of the West, banking and finance have played an important role as vital infrastructure for the economy.
A strong banking industry is necessary for households and businesses to engage in the spending, saving, and investment that constitute economic activity, and one of the purposes of financial regulation is to ensure that banks continue to be able to serve this purpose.
So it is my plan today to talk about the economy of the West and link the recent and future performance of the western economy to the central and supportive role banks play as vital infrastructure in their communities.
What do we mean by the West? Before this audience, I approach this question with respect and a little caution, because I know that in a broad sense, it is what the Center for the American West has been addressing since its founding.
I do so partly because this is a common definition of the West, and because it is the one used by the U.S.
Even using my more modest definition, the West still represents half of the land area of the United States.
This is important in this context because of one theme I will be exploring today, which is the economy of the rural West and the banking services available there.
Another way to put it is that while the West is half of the United States geographically, it is only a quarter of its population.2 Eight of the 13 states in our definition of the West are among the dozen in the nation with the lowest population density.3 Even after subtracting the large share of unpopulated government-owned land in the West, the overwhelming majority of the West is rural.
Five of the 15 largest metro areas in the United States are located in the West, and 90 percent of the entire region's population lives in cities, compared to 81 percent of the country as a whole.
I will return to the differences between urban and rural areas, but first, let's look at the economy of the West.
gross domestic product, almost exactly the share of the U.S.
This isn't entirely a coincidence, because population relates to labor supply, which is one determinant of economic output.
I mention this because it is also true that the change in population over time has a bearing on the economic health of communities and regions, and is part of the story for economic growth in the western United States.
economy is strong, and the western economy is especially strong.
While we don't have state or regional numbers for this year, from 2015 through 2017, GDP, after adjusting for inflation, grew two to nearly three times as fast in the West as in the rest of the United States.
From 2008 through 2010, the western economy contracted four times as much as the average for all of the United States.
Taking a longer perspective, however, even with the booms and the busts that have characterized the West for upwards of 200 years, the West is still the fastest growing region of the United States.
This picture of the West leading the nation in economic growth is also reflected in population, a key factor in that growth.
From 2010 to 2017, the population of the West increased 7.4 percent, compared to 5.3 percent for the nation.7 One might guess that this strong growth is primarily in cities, and in fact reflects the drain of population from smaller towns that is reported to be happening all over the United States.
In the cities of the West, those communities of 50,000 or more, the population grew 7.8 percent from 2010 to 2017, eclipsed by the 10 percent growth in southern cities but well above the 2 percent to 3 percent increase in the cities of the Northeast and Midwest.8 At the same time, the West led the other regions of the United States in growth for towns and cities from 10,000 to 50,000 in size, and likewise for towns between 5,000 and 10,000.
What about the West, where urbanization is happening more quickly than anywhere else? In fact, the average western small town grew 7.8 percent in those seven years, which is roughly the same healthy pace of growth registered in western towns and cities from the smallest to the largest.
I don't mean to minimize the challenges small towns face, because they are considerable, or suggest that western small towns are immune to them, because they certainly are not.
Another lesson is that population growth and the attendant economic growth in the West is not zero sum, and that small towns can still grow healthily while the metropolises of the West continue to attract people, partly from outside the region.
I will return to the issue of how the economies of the urban and rural West differ, but the backdrop is that population data are promising for both.
Now that I have outlined how the economy of the West relates to that of the rest of the United States, let me do the same for banking in the West.
There is a lot to this topic, but my focus is banking as it is experienced at the retail level by households and small- and medium-sized businesses.
Some of you are old enough to remember Frank Church, the U.S.
One dimension to how households and most businesses experience banking is the number of banks competing for their services, and one difference between the West and the East is that the West has fewer banks, even if we count them on a per capita basis.9 In addition, banks in the West tend to be larger.
One reason for the disparity in the average number and size of banks is that historically, a larger share of western states allowed statewide branching or had relatively limited branching restrictions, leading to the development of fewer and larger banks.10
In metropolitan areas of the West, the average number of banks was 23 in 2017, compared to 27 in eastern metro areas.
In rural counties of the West, customers had access to an average of 4.6 banks in 2017, compared to 5.4 banks in the East.
In both urban and rural areas, in both the East and the West, the average number of banks increased in the years leading up to the financial crisis but has been declining since then.
Over the last 20 years, rural westerners have consistently had access to something like 20 percent fewer banks than rural easterners, which amounts to about one less bank per rural county.
In any community, access to credit is essential for economic growth.
Small businesses heavily rely on banks for funding, and community banks, those with less than $10 billion in assets, account for a disproportionate share of bank lending to small businesses.
But across the country, the number of community banks has fallen by half over the past 20 years, mostly due to consolidation.
Rural westerners have access to far fewer banks overall than rural easterners, but that understates the disparity when some western counties are the size of Maryland or Massachusetts and many are more than a hundred miles across, so that access to a limited number of banks can be difficult or out of reach.
This account is culled from a series of public meetings that the Federal Reserve is convening in communities all around the country, in support of our responsibilities overseeing community banks and promoting community development.
It is just off an isolated stretch of interstate, and its economy depends on those passersby and tourism related to outdoor recreation.
In 2014, Green River lost its only bank, and around that time, banks closed in several nearby communities.
Businesses have become banks for many residents, agreeing to cash their checks.
Because of this new service to residents, and the long distance to a real bank, retail businesses say they are carrying much larger amounts of cash, which has heightened security concerns and prompted some merchants to invest in new safes.
Security is also a concern for residents who no longer have access to safety deposit boxes for valuables and important papers.
Faster and more efficient electronic payments hold some promise to bridge these gaps, eventually, and the Federal Reserve is working hard on this and making significant progress.
Relationship-based lending that is the hallmark of community banking can stem losses during downturns, since community banks may be able to work with borrowers to avoid losses.
Research has shown that small business lending at smaller banks declined less severely than at large banks during the last recession.
One of the reasons that community banks continue to succeed in many places is their understanding of their customers' needs and opportunities to invest in families and businesses.
But let me remind you of the very encouraging data I cited on the growth of small towns in the West.
It is my hope that the opportunity for the future that this population growth suggests will support the local banks that communities need to thrive.
A significant part of the Federal Reserve's recent regulatory focus has been aimed at streamlining regulations and reducing the regulatory burden on smaller and regional banks.
The Fed, along with the other banking agencies, recently proposed a community bank leverage ratio that is designed to simplify significantly the standards banks must abide by for holding capital.11 As a result, qualifying community banks will only need to calculate and meet a single measure of capital adequacy, rather than multiple measures.
We have also proposed a reduction in the burden of reporting requirements for community banks, and expect soon to propose an exemption for community banks to the Volcker rule.12 For a subset of the smallest banks--those with less than $5 billion in total assets--we have also lengthened the amount of time between supervisory examinations and expanded eligibility of small bank holding companies that qualify for an exemption to the Federal Reserve's capital rules, a policy that was designed to promote local ownership of small banks and to help maintain banks in rural areas.13
Most recently, the Federal Reserve spearheaded a proposal to tailor regulation that applies to firms that are larger than community banks, but the potential failure of which generally does not pose risks to the financial system.14 These are firms with between $100 billion and $250 billion in total assets.
Those changes are designed to reduce unnecessary regulatory burdens on specific institutions without any loss of resiliency for the financial system.
By these steps, I believe the Federal Reserve is helping community banks remain competitive and play the central role they have long played as vital infrastructure for rural communities.
The future of community banks in these communities is one reason that I'm optimistic about the economic prospects of small towns in the West, which continue to grow even as the region and the nation overall becomes more urban.
That's a good thing, because small towns, and especially their values, have long helped define the West, and I hope will continue to do so.
Source: Federal Reserve Board staff calculations were done using data from the following website: "List of states and territories of the United States by population," Wikipedia, last modified November 18, 2018.
Source: "List of states and territories of the United States by population density," Wikipedia, last modified October 12, 2018.
Source: "Urbanization in the United States," Wikipedia, last modified November 10, 2018.
Statistics presented in this paragraph and the next two paragraphs are derived from the following website: "Comparative Economic Indicators: Year vs.
Year Analysis of Growth and Change," Regional Economic Analysis Project.
Statistics presented in this paragraph and the next two paragraphs are derived from the following website: "The West and South Lead the Way," United States Census Bureau, last modified October 1, 2018.
The source for statistics presented in this paragraph and the next three paragraphs is Federal Reserve Board staff calculations using bank Reports of Condition and Income filed with the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, Thrift Financial Reports filed with the Office of Thrift Supervision, and Summary of Deposits filed with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Even though state banking restrictions were eliminated in most states decades ago, the differences in the number of banks across states have persisted.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Agencies propose community bank leverage ratio for qualifying community banking organizations," news releases, November 21, 2018.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Agencies issue proposal to streamline regulatory reporting for qualifying small institutions," news release, November 7, 2018.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Agencies issue interim final rules expanding examination cycle for qualifying small banks and U.S.
branches of foreign banks," news release, August 23, 2018 and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board issues interim final rule expanding the applicability of the Board's small bank holding company policy statement," news release, August 28, 2018.
Of course, while the holding companies of community banks may be eligible for an exemption from capital rules, the subsidiary banks are still subject to capital requirements.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on framework that would more closely match regulations for large banking organizations with their risk profiles," news release, October 31, 2018.


When I first arrived at the Board, Chair Yellen offered me the opportunity to lead the Committee on Consumer and Community Affairs--even though I had little experience in this area.
After visits to 16 communities across the country--both rural and urban--I can attest to the richness of our community development work.
It helps us see the economy as it is experienced by Americans in their communities.
It provides a valuable perspective on our monetary policy goals by putting names and faces on the aggregate unemployment statistics.
It helps us spot problems in consumer credit in overstretched communities well before they show up in national statistics.
And it is essential in helping our banks meet their affirmative obligations to the low- and moderate-income communities they serve and to understand what is likely to be most effective in lifting up the lives of people in challenged communities.
Janet Yellen's experience as president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco during some of the most challenging economic times for our country no doubt shaped her commitment to the Federal Reserve's community development work.2 One associate from the San Francisco Federal Reserve Bank recounts a meeting at the height of the crisis when staff suggested their exhausted boss should take a break from the round-the-clock emergency meetings.
Then-President Yellen stated that she had an obligation to continue working until such time that families were no longer losing their homes, their livelihoods, and their pensions.
It is perhaps no accident that Chair Yellen delivered her first speech as Chair at a community reinvestment conference.3
In navigating the Federal Open Market Committee's objectives of price stability and full employment, Chair Yellen was attentive to low- and moderate-income communities, recognizing that Americans on the most precarious rungs of the ladder often feel the impacts of a downturn soonest and the longest.4 Chair Yellen brought the subject of economic disparities to the forefront of our conversations, consistently emphasizing the importance of an economy that works for everyone.5
As Chair, Janet Yellen continued her practice of meeting with community members, where she had in-depth conversations about disparities in employment, labor force participation, income, and wealth, recognizing these direct interactions provide valuable insights no statistic or report can fully capture.
For instance, she visited the Manufacturing Technology Center on Cuyahoga Community College's Metropolitan Campus where she participated in a roundtable discussion on the state of manufacturing workforce development in Northeast Ohio.6
In our service to the American people, we recognize that our monetary policy, financial stability, and supervisory activities have an important influence on the financial health of Americans in communities across the country.
Promoting community development is one of the key purposes and functions of the Federal Reserve, and we have a responsibility to ensure that consumer and community perspectives inform Federal Reserve policy, research, and actions, including vulnerable communities.7
In his inaugural remarks as Chairman, Jay Powell underscored that it is our duty at the Federal Reserve to "approach every issue through a rigorous evaluation of the facts, theory, empirical analysis, and relevant research."8 That lens informs our community development responsibilities: we seek to learn from the experience of manufacturing workers, homeowners, community bankers, nonprofit executives, community organizers, and small business owners to help inform our policymaking.9
Under Chair Yellen's leadership, the Board of Governors established a Community Advisory Council (CAC) to help provide regular insights into the conditions facing low- and moderate-income communities.10 Recently, CAC members provided informative public comments to the Board on the Community Reinvestment Act and current market conditions within low- and moderate-income communities.11
Under Chair Powell’s leadership, Eric Belsky, Anna Boyd, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland President Loretta Mester--who chairs the Committee on Research, Public Information, and Community Affairs for Reserve Bank presidents--and community development staff across the System are continuing to advance this agenda.
Over the past year, all 12 Reserve Banks have adopted a common community development strategic plan that seeks to advance the economic resilience and mobility of low- and moderate-income households and communities and to enhance public awareness of these issues.
During Chair Yellen's 16 years as a public servant in the Federal Reserve, her words, actions, and research demonstrated a deep commitment to striving for an inclusive economy and recognizing the challenges faced by underserved communities.12 From her speeches to her policy deliberations, Janet made clear that her duty was to serve Main Street and all Americans.
The Award for Excellence in Community Development that we are establishing tonight memorializes Janet Yellen's commitment to the people and places that make up our vibrant economy, including those who face challenges.
Going forward, we will look to celebrate staff within the System like Ariel Cisneros--the first to receive this award in Janet Yellen's name--thus honoring those who innovate, trailblaze, and embody the same deep-seated commitment to low- and moderate-income communities that Janet Yellen espouses.
Yellen, "What the Federal Reserve Is Doing to Promote a Stronger Job Market" (speech at the 2014 National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conference, Chicago, Illinois, March 31, 2014).
"Differences in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups tend to widen sharply during recessions, as less advantaged groups shoulder an outsized share of total layoffs, and these differences shrink during recoveries.
For example, in the second quarter of 2017, the unemployment rate for black adult men was a little more than 3 percentage points higher than for white adult men.
This differential, while sizable, is nonetheless close to the smallest gap seen since comparable data became available in the mid-1970s." Lael Brainard, "Why Persistent Employment Disparities Matter for the Economy's Health" (speech at "Disparities in the Labor Market: What Are We Missing?" a research conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C., September 26, 2017).
Yellen, Opening Remarks (speech at the "Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy," a community development research conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C., April 2, 2017).
Yellen, "Inflation, Uncertainty, and Monetary Policy" (speech at the "Prospects for Growth: Reassessing the Fundamentals" 59th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Cleveland, Ohio, September 26, 2017).
See the 10th edition of the Federal Reserve System Purposes & Functions (PDF).
Powell, Remarks (speech at the Ceremonial Swearing-in at the Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C., February 13, 2018.
For examples of the Federal Reserve's analysis of community and household economic issues, see the Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking, Small Business Credit Survey, and Investing in America's Workforce.
"The Community Advisory Council (CAC) was formed by the Federal Reserve Board in 2015 to offer diverse perspectives on the economic circumstances and financial services needs of consumers and communities, with a particular focus on the concerns of low- and moderate-income populations." www.federalreserve.gov/aboutthefed/cac.htm.
Lael Brainard, "Community Investment in Denver" (speech at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Denver Branch, Denver, Colorado, October 15, 2018).
Yellen served as a member of the Board of Governors from August 12, 1994, to February 17, 1997; President and CEO of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco from 2004 to 2010; Vice Chair of the Board of Governors from October 4, 2010, to February 3, 2014; and Chair and Executive Officer of the Board of Governors from February 3, 2014, through February 3, 2018 (www.federalreservehistory.org/people/janet_l_yellen).

It's an honor to be part of this important occasion.
Tonight is an opportunity to recognize the vital contributions of the Federal Reserve's community development staff, and an opportunity to honor Chair Yellen, who did so much to advance the Fed's community development mission.
Briefly, I would like to focus on the importance of promoting a strong economy that extends opportunity to all and on the role our community development staff plays to advance that goal.
The Federal Reserve's mission is to promote a strong economy and sound financial system; I am glad to say we have made a great deal of progress toward those goals.
Unemployment is 3.7 percent, the lowest in nearly half a century.
Beyond the labor market, there are other signs of economic strength.
The steady decline in the unemployment rate is mirrored by the decline in financial hardship reported by respondents to the Federal Reserve's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking over the past five years.1 Wage gains, increased household wealth, and elevated consumer confidence are supporting robust consumer spending.
Since the crisis, we have also taken numerous steps to make the financial system safer and stronger, leaving it better equipped to support the financial needs of consumers and communities through good times and bad.2
However, the benefits of this strong economy and sound financial system have not reached all Americans.
The aggregate statistics tend to mask important disparities by income, race, and geography.
Moreover, the economy faces a number of longer-term challenges.3 While there have been gains in the pace of wage growth recently, wages for lower-income workers have grown quite slowly over the past few decades.
An aging population is limiting growth in labor supply, which in turn limits potential growth.
And a decades-long decline in economic mobility in the United States reflects the difficulty faced by lower-income Americans in moving up the economic ladder.4
The Fed's community development function plays a key role in helping us carry out our broad responsibilities.
Information gathered by the community development staff ensures that the perspectives of individuals and communities inform the Fed's research, policy, and actions.
Soliciting diverse views on issues affecting the economy and financial markets improves the quality of our research, the fairness of our policies, and the transparency of our actions.
Raising awareness of emerging economic trends and risks makes regulation and supervision more responsive to evolving consumer financial services markets and technologies.
The Fed's community development function also advances our Community Reinvestment Act responsibilities by analyzing and disseminating information related to local financial needs and successful approaches for attracting and deploying capital.
These efforts strengthen the capacity of both financial institutions and community organizations to meet the needs of the communities they serve.
In addition to providing us with a richer, more nuanced understanding of current economic and financial conditions, the Federal Reserve's community development staff is deeply engaged in helping lower-income and underserved communities overcome their challenges and capitalize on their assets.
Successful community development invests in and builds up both the physical infrastructure and human capital in underserved areas.
The Federal Reserve is uniquely positioned to bring together diverse stakeholders to disseminate information, exchange ideas, and identify shared interests that foster local partnerships and comprehensive solutions.
I want to thank Ariel Cisneros--our distinguished inaugural recipient of the Yellen Award for Excellence in Community Development--as well as each of you for your individual and collective service to this effort.
And speaking of service: It is fitting that this award for excellence in community development will today and thenceforth be given in honor of Janet Yellen.
During your tenure as Chair, Janet, you elevated the importance of economic and financial inclusion and the Fed's role in community development.
You reminded us that an inclusive economy is a vibrant economy.
Governor Brainard, the principal oversight governor for community development, and I are honored to carry this message forward.
The economy benefits when we successfully tap into the underutilized potential of more of our fellow Americans.5
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S.
Powell, "Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy" (speech at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 24, 2018).
356 (April 2017), 398–406; Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez, "Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.

Treasury Market" Fourth Annual Conference Hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York
I am pleased to join the fourth annual conference on the evolving structure of the U.S.
Four years ago, the Treasury "flash rally" served as a wake-up call for regulators and market participants alike that the structure of the Treasury market had changed radically from the conventional view.
Since the surprising sharp spike in Treasury prices on October 15, 2014, the public sector has devoted significant effort and resources to monitoring the ongoing changes in the Treasury market.
The interagency working group's (IAWG) Joint Staff Report on the events of October 15, the Treasury Department's request for information on the report's recommendations, and the subsequent collection of transactions data by the Financial Industry Regulatory Authority (FINRA) through its Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine (TRACE) system have offered us a much better understanding of this market.1
But the market is not resting, and neither can we.
I would like to talk about the changes we are seeing, what we are learning from the TRACE data, and emerging developments that are important to monitor.
In particular, I want to highlight an initiative that the Federal Reserve is considering to expand the public sector's access to transactions data in order to help ensure the IAWG is able to keep up with the market.
At the first Treasury conference in 2015, market participants were still processing the results of the Joint Staff Report.2 It came as a surprise to many that the high-frequency trading activity conducted by "proprietary trading firms," or PTFs, accounted for a majority of trading in the interdealer platforms that are so central to the Treasury market.
Indeed, the names of the largest proprietary trading firms were new even to some seasoned professionals.
At that time, the discussion often drew a very bright line between traditional dealers and proprietary trading firms and, in particular, the trading activities associated with each.
The distinction between broker-dealers and proprietary trading firms remains important today with regard to why they are trading, but less and less with regard to how they are trading.
Proprietary trading firms trade for their own account rather than that of a client, which places them outside of FINRA's jurisdiction and many other forms of oversight.
But the distinction in how broker-dealers and proprietary trading firms trade was already starting to blur by the time of the first conference.
A number of developers of emerging financial technologies, or fintech, have arisen in recent years to provide dealers and other market participants with back-office tools that reduce costs by automating routine processes, streamlining regulatory reporting, and more efficiently allocating capital, collateral, and margin among competing uses.
The landscape for proprietary trading firms has changed considerably in recent years, too.
Since 2015, we have witnessed the first initial public offering by a proprietary trading firm, as well as a few high-profile mergers and acquisitions.3 The industry is contending with declining revenue growth and diminished returns by expanding operations into new asset classes and geographies.
Still others have entered joint ventures with one another to finance new investment in faster microwave communications and defray the high costs of that infrastructure.4 Third-party providers are also offering high-speed links to firms that wish to engage in high-frequency trading without investing directly in microwave tower infrastructure.
We have seen important recent changes among infrastructure providers as well.
Morgan's exit from broker-dealer settlement services in the triparty Treasury repo market and the transition to BNY Mellon Government Securities Services Corp.
And, finally, the macroeconomic landscape has undergone some significant changes that have important implications for the Treasury market.
At the time of the flash rally in October 2014, the Federal Reserve was still actively purchasing Treasury securities, and the federal funds rate was still at the effective lower bound.
With the economy now at or beyond full employment and inflation around target, the Federal Open Market Committee has since gradually increased its target for the federal funds rate to between 2 and 2-1/4 percent, and normalization of the balance sheet is well under way.
Since October 2017, the portfolio of the System Open Market Account has decreased in size from $4.2 trillion to about $3.9 trillion.
Against this changed backdrop and with more than a year's worth of information from the TRACE data available, it is a good time to ask what we have learned since the initial market event and what questions remain.
First, the initiation of policy normalization and the ongoing reduction of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet do not appear to have sparked a deterioration in Treasury market liquidity.
Standard metrics such as bid-ask spreads have not materially changed for benchmark securities since 2014.
Market functioning has also been orderly during a number of recent events that were characterized by high trading volume and elevated price volatility, such as in early February of this year.
Second, some segments of the market seem much more active than observers may have feared before the collection of TRACE data.
In particular, according to the TRACE data as shown in figure 1, off-the-run trading accounts for 27 percent of overall trading volume, while deep off-the-run notes and bonds--seasoned securities older than the first or second off-the-run--account for 14 percent of all coupon activity.7 Likewise, the data show that Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) trade in significant volumes as well.
While substantial analysis with respect to pricing and liquidity remains to be done in these market segments, the early results allow us to conclude that these securities do trade in meaningful amounts.
Third, although there was speculation that proprietary trading firms had already eclipsed bank dealers in benchmark Treasury trading or would come to threaten the dealer business model more broadly, neither has occurred.8 Based on the TRACE data, as shown in figure 2, we can now state with a reasonable amount of confidence that dealers generally--and primary dealers particularly--still intermediate the majority of activity in all Treasury securities.9 In the market for Treasury bills in particular, primary dealers play an important role in allocating issuance to investors.
Federal Reserve staff analysis of the TRACE data reveals that nearly three-fourths of total trading volume of bills is in the DTC market, where dealers are, of course, the main intermediary.
From this and other analysis, there is substantial evidence that the dealer business model plays a central role in this market and will continue to do so into the future.10
That said, proprietary trading firms do occupy an important space in the Treasury market alongside dealers, and it is clear that they, too, are here to stay.
When it comes to areas where speed is paramount--for instance, in trading across and between asset classes and trading venues‑‑proprietary trading firms are deploying technology and infrastructure in ways that are having lasting effects.
This is evident in the Treasury market in the intervals following economic data releases.
Again turning to the TRACE data, we see in figure 4 a depiction of average trading volumes of all Treasury securities across five-minute intervals on days in which the Employment Situation report, gross domestic product data, or consumer price index data are announced.
The TRACE volume data indicate that the immediate surge in trading activity following these announcements occurs mainly in the electronic IDB venue, where proprietary trading firms dominate.
Our analysis makes clear that the Treasury market has adapted well to the post-crisis regulatory regime, the normalization of monetary policy, and technological changes in trading processes, and that both broker-dealers and proprietary trading firms play important, often complementary, roles in the market structure that has emerged.
Of course, the structure of the Treasury market will continue to evolve, along with changes in technology and the broader financial environment.
Although all-to-all trading in the Treasury market was contemplated at the first conference, direct streaming largely was not, which might prompt us to ask what else is on the horizon.
In addition to direct streaming, another development that bears watching is the batch auction platforms that have arisen in the voice IDB market, something that has not received as much attention from market participants.
Started after the financial crisis, batch auctions are now conducted by a number of IDB firms at regular intervals throughout the trading day.
After the batch auction closes, the orders are matched, and participants are notified of their awards.11 Figure 5, based on TRACE data, depicts average trading volumes of TIPS securities in the IDB venue of the market across five-minute intervals.
As you can see, the level of activity rises significantly at intervals, which correspond to the timing of the auctions.
While it is not a large part of the overall market, this activity appears to be an important innovation for segments often deemed to be less liquid--in particular, for off-the-run and TIPS trading on voice IDBs.
Recently, the debate over liquidity has turned toward the participation of proprietary trading firms in the off-the-run segment of the market, an area outside of their traditional domain.
I look forward to further analysis as the structure of the market continues to evolve.
As the Treasury market has evolved, the public sector has had to evolve as well in order to keep up.
Our colleagues at Treasury, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and FINRA deserve credit for the work to begin collecting Treasury transaction data on FINRA's TRACE system.
My hope is that you will take away from my remarks, along with those of my colleagues from other agencies, a comprehensive picture of how all of the IAWG agencies are using the data to work through the many issues that intersect with our various policy missions and mandates.
As the market continues to innovate and the broader financial environment continues to shift, we will maintain our focus on the resilience of the Treasury market specifically and the financial system more broadly.12 In this regard, the staff at the Federal Reserve continues to work on important issues raised by the events of October 15, 2014.
Markets have been able to weather several episodes of short-lived market turbulence well in the past few years.
But the fact that sharp market movements--some on the order of seven or eight standard deviations outside the norm--can occur even in the absence of clear news drivers remains a concern and highlights the potential risks to financial stability posed by the high-speed transmission of price and liquidity shocks across multiple markets and trading venues.
While trading volumes in both the electronic IDB and DTC market segments were markedly higher than average, some metrics of liquidity, such as market depth near the top of the order book on major electronic IDB platforms, deteriorated and remained low through the week.
The pattern of a spike in trading volumes followed by a persistent decline in market depth has been characteristic of three recent market turmoil episodes: (1) the Treasury flash rally on October 15, 2014; (2) the flash crash in the British pound on October 7, 2016; and (3) the spike in the VIX on February 5, 2018.13 Figure 6 shows this pattern for February 5, 2018.
These seemingly contradictory dynamics are easier to reconcile if the prevalent role played by high-speed electronic trading in the Treasury market is taken into account, particularly under stressed conditions.
As previously noted in the Joint Staff Report, high-speed market makers are able to manage perceived risks from sudden adverse price moves by greatly reducing the sizes of orders placed on electronic execution venues while, at the same time, increasing order placement rates as much as needed to accommodate increased trading volumes without the need to widen bid-ask spreads.
That said, the ability of high-speed market makers to nearly simultaneously adjust liquidity provision across multiple closely linked markets can create potential challenges for large institutional investors seeking to reliably aggregate posted liquidity among otherwise distinct trading venues.14 The dynamic nature of liquidity provision by high-speed market makers makes static measures of liquidity, such as posted bid-ask spreads and market depth, less useful.
For the purposes of improving our assessment of financial stability, it is therefore necessary to look for alternative ways of gauging liquidity and transaction costs in these markets.
For example, measures such as implementation shortfall aim to account directly for the difference between the original decision price and the final execution price for a trade split into multiple smaller transactions.15 As IAWG staff members continue to refine the TRACE data to assess market resilience more accurately in light of changes in structure and speed, it will be important to incorporate alternative measures of liquidity and transaction costs.
Separately, the increased role of managed funds is also having an effect on the Treasury market.
has become an important liquidity point during the trading day for Treasury securities.
spike in trading volumes tends to be fairly evenly divided between the DTC and IDB market segments, suggesting that both dealers and proprietary trading firms play an important role during this narrow window of activity.
would be consistent with the increased role of proprietary trading firms in intraday intermediation and the possible closeout of positions toward the end of the main part of the trading day.
From a market resilience perspective, it would be valuable to analyze these systematic intraday spikes in trading volumes, particularly as they may influence price formation and liquidity provision in the Treasury market.
The large spike in flows toward the end of the trading day points to a financial stability consideration that is worth flagging.
The Treasury Market Practices Group (TMPG) has done valuable work in mapping out clearing and settlement patterns in the Treasury market.
One issue that this analysis highlights is the currently limited potential for same day, or T+0, settlement on transactions conducted near the end of the day.
The flash events we have seen in the Treasury market so far have occurred early enough in the day to allow time for prices to recover before market close, and they have not been accompanied by any participant's failure to perform, let alone a major participant, platform, or exchange.
As the TMPG's work shows, most transactions in the Treasury market settle the next day, or T+1.
As can be seen in figure 8, Federal Reserve staff analysis based on the transactions recorded in TRACE shows that same-day settlement volumes, on average, represent only about 4 percent of total daily volume, with the rest concentrated primarily on one-day settlement.
It is not clear from the TRACE data whether the market could accommodate a large sale of Treasury securities later in the day, perhaps associated with a need to raise cash quickly to settle outstanding positions, without causing a substantial move in prices.
It will be important to follow closely how the market evolves in light of the potential risks and resilience issues identified in the recent TMPG white paper on clearing and settlement in the secondary market for U.S.
The Federal Reserve is close to finalizing an agreement with FINRA to act as our agent in expanding the collection of Treasury transactions to key banks that are also active in this market.
In addition, in light of recent changes in the market, the Board has decided to issue a notice of proposed rulemaking to seek public comment on collecting agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and debt transactions as well.
This collection will help round out the IAWG's view of these markets and ensure continuous coverage in circumstances where trading moves between the bank and the broker-dealer within a firm.
It is important that reporting thresholds be appropriately tailored to avoid imposing undue burden on smaller firms, and we will be particularly attentive to public comments on this matter.
I see important potential benefits of transparency under appropriate circumstances.
The Treasury Department is currently considering these issues, and we would seek to harmonize our approach with any future decisions by the Treasury Department and the IAWG in making Treasury transactions data available to the public.
Our expectation is also that Federal Reserve policy would be harmonized with FINRA's practices in making anonymized agency MBS and debt transactions publicly available, taking into account what we learn from the comment process.
In sum, we recognize it is vitally important for the Federal Reserve and other agencies to keep up with the rapid changes we are seeing in the Treasury market.
The Treasury market is a cornerstone of the global financial system: Treasury securities are used to finance the federal government, represent a store of value for investors and households alike, and serve as the primary reserve asset for the global financial system.
The Treasury market is also vital to the Federal Reserve: It is central to the transmission of our monetary policy, provides key signals on market expectations for inflation and future interest rates, and is a key source of high-quality liquid assets for the banking system.
Given the centrality of the Treasury market, it is all the more notable that access to data on Treasury market transactions on par with those available for futures, equity, and corporate bond markets is a very recent development.
Recognizing that the market will continue to evolve, we are committed to doing our part to make sure the scope of our data and their availability evolve commensurately.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Department of the Treasury, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, U.S.
Commodity Futures Trading Commission (2015), Joint Staff Report: The U.S.
Treasury Market on October 15, 2014 (PDF) (Washington: Treasury, Board of Governors, FRBNY, SEC, and CFTC, July).
See CMG Group (2018), "CME Group Completes Acquisition of NEX, Creating a Leading Global Markets Company across Futures, Cash and OTC," press release, November 2.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 29, 2018, https://doi.org/10.17016/2380-7172.2299.
See Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2015), "Conference Summary: The Evolving Structure of the U.S.
The Securities and Exchange Commission recently approved a rule change proposed by FINRA to require some reporters in TRACE to identify non-FINRA member activity.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), Supervision and Regulation Report (Washington: Board of Governors, November).
Flash events that have occurred in recent years include, but are not limited to, the first "flash crash" in U.S.
equity markets on May 6, 2010; the Treasury flash rally of October 15, 2014, the flash event in U.S.
equity markets on August 24, 2015; the pound flash crash on October 7, 2016; and the turbulence in U.S.
See also Ernst Schaumburg and Ron Yang (2015), "Liquidity during Flash Events," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), August 18.
See Dobrislav Dobrev and Ernst Schaumburg (2015), "The Liquidity Mirage," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Liberty Street Economics (blog), October 9.
See Bank for International Settlements, Markets Committee (2018), Monitoring of Fast-Paced Electronic Markets (PDF) (Basel, Switzerland: BIS, September).
See Treasury Market Practices Group (2018), "White Paper on Clearing and Settlement in the Secondary Market for U.S.
Treasury Securities (PDF)," consultative white paper (New York: TMPG, July); and Treasury Market Practices Group (2018), Clearing and Settlement in the Secondary Market for U.S.

At The Economic Club of New York, New York, New York
It is a pleasure to be back at the Economic Club of New York.
My main subject today will be the profound transformation since the Global Financial Crisis in the Federal Reserve's approach to monitoring and addressing financial stability.
Today marks the publication of the Board of Governors' first Financial Stability Report.
Together, these reports contain a wealth of information on our approach to financial stability and to financial regulation more broadly.
Congress assigned the Federal Reserve the job of promoting maximum employment and price stability.
I am pleased to say that our economy is now close to both of those objectives.
The unemployment rate is 3.7 percent, a 49-year low, and many other measures of labor market strength are at or near historic bests.
The economy is growing at an annual rate of about 3 percent, well above most estimates of its longer-run trend.
For seven years during the crisis and its painful aftermath, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) kept our policy interest rate unprecedentedly low--in fact, near zero--to support the economy as it struggled to recover.
The health of the economy gradually but steadily improved, and about three years ago the FOMC judged that the interests of households and businesses, of savers and borrowers, were no longer best served by such extraordinarily low rates.
We therefore began to raise our policy rate gradually toward levels that are more normal in a healthy economy.
Interest rates are still low by historical standards, and they remain just below the broad range of estimates of the level that would be neutral for the economy‑‑that is, neither speeding up nor slowing down growth.
My FOMC colleagues and I, as well as many private-sector economists, are forecasting continued solid growth, low unemployment, and inflation near 2 percent.
Our gradual pace of raising interest rates has been an exercise in balancing risks.
We know that moving too fast would risk shortening the expansion.
We also know that moving too slowly--keeping interest rates too low for too long--could risk other distortions in the form of higher inflation or destabilizing financial imbalances.
Our path of gradual increases has been designed to balance these two risks, both of which we must take seriously.
We also know that the economic effects of our gradual rate increases are uncertain, and may take a year or more to be fully realized.
While FOMC participants' projections are based on our best assessments of the outlook, there is no preset policy path.
We will be paying very close attention to what incoming economic and financial data are telling us.
As always, our decisions on monetary policy will be designed to keep the economy on track in light of the changing outlook for jobs and inflation.
Under the dual mandate, jobs and inflation are the Fed's meat and potatoes.
A stable financial system is one that continues to function effectively even in severely adverse conditions.
A stable system meets the borrowing and investment needs of households and businesses despite economic turbulence.
An unstable system, in contrast, may amplify turbulence and prolong economic hardship in the face of stress by failing to provide these essential services when they are needed most.
For Economic Club of New York trivia buffs, I will note that the second ever presentation to this club by a Federal Reserve official was about this very topic.
Weeks before, the Fed had issued a public statement of concern over stock market speculation, and had provided guidance frowning on bank funding of such speculation.
William Harding, a former Fed Chair and then president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, defended the Fed's actions in his talk.
He argued that, while the Fed should not act as the arbiter of correct asset prices, it did have a primary responsibility to protect the banking system's capacity to meet the credit needs of households and businesses.
At the meeting, critics argued that public statements about inflated asset prices were "fraught with danger;" that the nation's banks were so well managed that they should not "face public admonition"; and, more generally, that the Fed was "out of its sphere."1 Of course, Harding spoke just a few months before the 1929 stock market crash, which signaled the onset of the Great Depression.2
Fast forwarding, a host of Depression-era reforms helped avoid, for the next three-quarters of a century, a systemic financial crisis and the associated severe economic dislocation‑‑the longest such period in American history.
Those decades saw many advances in monetary policy and in bank regulatory policy, but the appropriate role for government in managing threats to the broader financial system remained unresolved.
Periodic bouts of financial stress during this period--such as the Latin American debt crisis, the savings and loan crisis, and the Russian debt default--were met with improvised responses.
Policymakers conjured fixes from a mixture of private-sector rescues, emergency liquidity, occasional implicit or explicit bailouts, and monetary accommodation.
Outside of these crisis responses, however, systemic issues were not a central focus of policy.
The Global Financial Crisis demonstrated, in the clearest way, the limits of this approach.
The crisis made clear that there can be no macroeconomic stability without financial stability, and that systemic stability risks often take root and blossom in good times.3 Thus, as the emergency phase of the crisis subsided, Congress, the Fed, and the other financial regulators began developing a fundamentally different approach to financial stability.
Instead of relying on improvised responses after crises strike, policymakers now constantly monitor vulnerabilities and require firms to plan in advance for financial distress, in a framework that lays out solutions in advance during good times.
Second, develop and apply a broad framework for monitoring financial stability on an ongoing basis.
And third, explain the new approach as transparently as possible, so that the public and its representatives in Congress can provide oversight and hold us accountable for this work.
Although I'll focus mainly on the stability efforts of the Federal Reserve, a number of federal regulatory agencies have responsibilities in this area.
All of these agencies are represented on the Financial Stability Oversight Council, or FSOC, which is chaired by the Treasury Secretary and which provides a forum for interagency cooperation in responding to emerging risks.
After 10 years of concentrated effort in the public and private sectors, the system is now much stronger, with greater capacity to function effectively in stressful times.
In the banking system, we have implemented a post-crisis regulatory framework based on robust capital and liquidity requirements, a strong stress-testing regime, and mandatory living wills for the largest firms.
As a result, banks now have much more high quality capital than before (figure 1).
The most recent stress tests indicate that, even after a severe global recession, capital levels at the largest banks would remain above regulatory minimums, and above the levels those banks held in good times before the crisis.4 The most systemically important financial institutions also now hold roughly 20 percent of their assets in the form of high quality liquid assets--that is, safe assets that could be readily sold at short notice (figure 2).
Compared with other economies, lending and borrowing in the United States depend less on bank loans and more on funds flowing through a wide array of capital market channels.
The crisis revealed that this capital market centric system, despite its many benefits, also provides more places where systemic risks can emerge.
In response, Congress and the regulatory agencies have made many stability-enhancing changes outside of the banking system.
Before the crisis, prime institutional money market funds were permitted to report a constant, $1 share price so long as the value of the underlying assets remained near $1.
This reporting convention, combined with the implicit support of the plans' sponsors, led investors to treat those funds like bank deposits, even though they were not likewise insured.
These funds are now required to report floating net-asset values, and after this reform investors chose to migrate to government-only funds, which are safer and less susceptible to runs (figure 3).5 These and other measures have reduced the risk that key non-bank parts of the system would freeze up in the face of market stress.
Innovation and risk-taking contribute to the dynamism of our financial system and our economy.
As Hyman Minsky emphasized, along with the many benefits of dynamism comes the reality that the financial system will sometimes evolve toward excess and dangerous imbalances.6 This reality underscores the vital importance of the second part of post-crisis reform: monitoring for emerging vulnerabilities.
As laid out in our new Financial Stability Report, we have developed a framework to help us monitor risks to stability in our complex and rapidly evolving financial system.
The framework distinguishes between shocks, that is, trigger events that can be hard to predict or influence, and vulnerabilities, defined as features of the financial system that amplify shocks.
Each of these vulnerabilities is often found to some degree even in healthy market-based systems, and there is not, at present, any generally accepted standard for assessing at what level the vulnerabilities begin to pose serious stability risks.
In lieu of such a standard, we flag cases in which the vulnerabilities rise well beyond historical norms, and then form judgments about the stability risks those cases present.
The first vulnerability is excessive leverage in the financial sector.7 If a highly leveraged segment of the financial system is buffeted by adverse events, the affected entities may all need to deleverage at the same time by selling assets, leading to what is called a "fire sale." Both the resulting decline in asset prices and the impaired ability of the segment to play its role in the economy can amplify the effects of a downturn.
As with banks, capital levels at insurance companies and broker-dealers appear robust.
The second vulnerability is funding risk, which arises when banks or nonbank financial entities rely on funding that can be rapidly withdrawn.
If depositors or market participants lose faith in the soundness of an institution or the system as a whole, unstable funding can simply vanish in what is called a "run." During the crisis, we saw widespread runs, including at broker-dealers, some segments of the repo market, and money market mutual funds.
Banks hold low levels of liabilities that are able and likely to run, and they hold high levels of liquid assets to fund any outflows that do occur.
Money market mutual fund reforms have greatly reduced the run risk in that sector.
More generally, it is short-term, uninsured funding that would be most likely to run in a future stress event, and the volume of such funding is now significantly below pre-crisis peaks.
Taken together, the evidence on these first two vulnerabilities strongly supports the view that financial institutions and markets are substantially more resilient than they were before the crisis.
Indeed, the American financial system has successfully weathered some periods of significant stress over the past several years.9
Credit booms have often led to credit busts and sometimes to painful economic downturns.
Defaults typically rise faster than had been expected, which may put financial institutions into distress.
These effects may combine to bring a serious economic downturn.
The net increase in mortgage debt has been among borrowers with higher credit scores.
While heavily indebted households always suffer in a downturn, all of this suggests that household debt would not present a systemic stability threat if the economy sours.
With corporate debt, the United States has not faced a massive credit boom like that experienced with residential mortgages before the recent crisis.
By this measure, the ratio of corporate debt to GDP is about where one might expect after nearly a decade of economic expansion: it is well above its trend, but not yet at the peaks hit in the late 1980s or late 1990s.
Further, the upward trend in recent years appears broadly consistent with the growth in business assets relative to GDP.
Information on individual firms reveals that, over the past year, firms with high leverage and interest burdens have been increasing their debt loads the most (see figure 7).
Some of these highly leveraged borrowers would surely face distress if the economy turned down, leading investors to take higher-than-expected losses--developments that could exacerbate the downturn.
The question for financial stability is whether elevated business bankruptcies and outsized losses would risk undermining the ability of the financial system to perform its critical functions on behalf of households and businesses.
For now, my view is that such losses are unlikely to pose a threat to the safety and soundness of the institutions at the core of the system and, instead, are likely to fall on investors in vehicles like collateralized loan obligations with stable funding that present little threat of damaging fire sales.10 Of course, we will continue to monitor developments in this sector carefully.
The fourth and final vulnerability arises when asset values rise far above conventional, historically observed valuation benchmarks--a phenomenon popularly referred to as a "bubble." The contentious term "bubble" does not appear in our work, however.11 Instead, we focus is on the extent to which an asset's price is high or low relative to conventional benchmarks based on expected payoffs and current economic conditions.
Historically, when asset prices soar far above standard benchmarks, sharp declines follow with some regularity, and those declines may bring economic misery reaching far beyond investors directly involved in the speculative boom.
Looking across the landscape of major asset classes, we see some classes for which valuations seem high relative to history.
For example, even after standard adjustments for economic conditions, valuations on riskier forms of corporate debt and commercial properties are in the upper ends of their post-crisis distributions, although they are short of the levels they hit in the pre-crisis credit boom.
We see no major asset class, however, where valuations appear far in excess of standard benchmarks as some did, for example, in the late 1990s dot-com boom or the pre-crisis credit boom.
The asset class that gets the most attention day-to-day is, of course, the stock market.
Today, equity market prices are broadly consistent with historical benchmarks such as forward price-to-earnings ratios (see figure 8).
It is important to distinguish between market volatility and events that threaten financial stability.
From the financial stability perspective, however, today we do not see dangerous excesses in the stock market.
In addition to monitoring vulnerabilities under our four-part framework, we also consult a broad range of contacts regarding sources of risk that might trigger distress at any given time.
For example, discussions with contacts currently point to risks emanating from the normalization of monetary policy in the United States and elsewhere, the unsettled state of trade negotiations, Brexit negotiations, budget discussions between Italy and the European Union, and cyber-related disruptions.12
banks and broker-dealers participate in some of the markets most likely to be affected by Brexit.
The Fed and other regulators have been working with U.S.
financial institutions that have operations in the European Union or the United Kingdom to prepare for the full range of possible outcomes to the negotiations.
In addition, the scenarios used in the stress tests routinely feature severe global contractions and show that U.S.
banks have the capital to weather even highly disruptive events.
My own assessment is that, while risks are above normal in some areas and below normal in others, overall financial stability vulnerabilities are at a moderate level.13
In my view, the most important feature of the stability landscape is the strength of the financial system.
The institutions at the heart of the financial system are more resilient.
The stress tests routinely feature extremely severe downturns in business credit, and the largest banks have the capital and liquidity to continue to function under such circumstances.
Because this core resilience is so important, we are committed to preserving and strengthening the key improvements since the crisis, particularly those in capital, liquidity, stress testing, and resolution.
I'd like to conclude by putting financial stability and our two new reports in a longer-term context.
Many baby boomers like me are, however, reaching an age where a good report is, "Well, there are a number of things we should keep an eye on, but all things considered you are in good health." That is how I view the Financial Stability Report out today.
We hope that this report and the Supervision and Regulation Report will be important tools, sharing Federal Reserve views and stimulating public dialogue regarding the stability of the financial system.
Harding at a dinner of the Economic Club of New York on March 18, 1929, as reported in "Clash on Policies of Reserve Board" by the New York Times on March 19, 1929, p.
52; and in "Reserve Policy Upheld and Hit" by the Wall Street Journal on March 19, 1929, p.
Many factors after the initial crash, including what are now seen as major policy errors, contributed to the Great Depression.
See Milton Friedman and Anna Jacobson Schwartz (1963), A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960 (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press); and Ben S.
Bernanke (1983), "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the Propagation of the Great Depression," American Economic Review, vol.
See the Federal Reserve's November 2018 Supervision and Regulation Report, available on the Board's website.
Given that government money fund asset holdings are limited to safe assets, they are allowed to maintain a $1 share price.
Data from the stress tests suggest that the nation's largest banks have committed about $1 trillion in lines of credit to nonbanks.
Examples include episodes of intensified concerns over euro-area fiscal challenges, the discontinuous and large appreciation of the Swiss franc in January 2015, and the market volatility associated with global growth concerns in late 2015.
Analysts differ over how to define the term "bubble," and debate continues about the degree to which economic fundamentals might explain even the most famous apparent bubble cases from history.
The Financial Stability Report does not currently have a standard set of metrics for determining the resiliency of critical financial systems to cyber disruptions.
Nonetheless, cyber risks are the subject of ongoing policy efforts at that Federal Reserve and other relevant agencies, and these entities are working to develop resiliency expectations and measures, which may be part of future discussions in the stability report.
The staff have also assessed financial stability vulnerabilities as moderate.
For instance, see the minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee meeting, July 31-August 1, 2018, available on the Board's website.


At The Clearing House and The Bank Policy Institute Annual Conference, New York, New York
I am delighted to be speaking at this annual conference of the Clearing House and the Bank Policy Institute.
Today I will discuss recent economic developments and the economic outlook before going on to outline my thinking about the connections between data dependence and monetary policy.
I will close with some observations on the implications for U.S.
economic fundamentals are robust, as indicated by strong growth in gross domestic product (GDP) and a job market that has been surprising on the upside for nearly two years.
Smoothing across the first three quarters of this year, real, or inflation-adjusted, GDP growth is averaging an annual rate of 3.3 percent.
Private-sector forecasts for the full year--that is, on a fourth-quarter-over-fourth-quarter basis--suggest that growth is likely to equal, or perhaps slightly exceed, 3 percent.
If this occurs, GDP growth in 2018 will be the fastest recorded so far during the current expansion, which in July entered its 10th year.
If, as I expect, the economic expansion continues in 2019, this will become the longest U.S.
Average monthly job gains continue to outpace the increase needed to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force over the longer run, with payrolls rising by 250,000 in October.
And, at 3.7 percent, the unemployment rate is the lowest it has been since 1969.
In addition, after remaining stubbornly sluggish throughout much of the expansion, nominal wage growth is picking up, with various measures now running in the neighborhood of 3 percent on an annual basis.
The inflation data in the year to date for the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) have been running at or close to our 2 percent objective, including on a core basis‑‑that is, excluding volatile food and energy prices.
While my base case is for this pattern to continue, it is important to monitor measures of inflation expectations to confirm that households and businesses expect price stability to be maintained.
The median of expected inflation 5-to-10 years in the future from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers is within--but I believe at the lower end of--the range consistent with price stability.
Likewise, inflation readings from the TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) market indicate to me that financial markets expect consumer price index (CPI) inflation of about 2 percent to be maintained.
That said, historically, PCE inflation has averaged about 0.3 percent less than CPI inflation, and if this were to continue, the readings from the TIPS market would indicate that expected PCE inflation is running at somewhat less than 2 percent.
What might explain why inflation is running at or close to the Federal Reserve's long-run objective of 2 percent, and not well above it, when growth is strong and the labor market robust? According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, productivity growth in the business sector, as measured by output per hour, is averaging 2 percent at an annualized rate this year, while aggregate hours worked in the business sector have risen at an average annual rate of 1.8 percent through the third quarter.
This decomposition--in which the growth in output is broken down into measures of aggregate supply, the growth of aggregate hours and the growth of output per hour--suggests that the growth rates of productivity and hours worked in 2018 each have been exceeding their respective longer-run rates as estimated by the Congressional Budget Office.2 In other words, while growth in aggregate demand in 2018 has been above the expected long-run growth rate in aggregate supply, it has not been exceeding this year's growth in actual aggregate supply.
Ultimately, hours growth will likely converge to a slower pace because of demographic factors.
But how rapidly this happens will depend in part on the behavior of labor force participation.
Labor participation by prime-age women has increased around 2 percentage points in the past three years and is now at its highest level in a decade.
That said, it is still 1-1/2 percentage points below the peak level reached in 2000.
Labor force participation among 25- to 54-year-old men has risen by roughly 1 percentage point in the past several years.
As for productivity growth, there is considerable uncertainty about how much of the rebound in productivity growth that we have seen in recent quarters is cyclical and how much is structural.
The structural, or trend, component of productivity growth is a function of capital deepening through business investment as well as a multifactor component sometimes referred to as the "Solow residual." Initial estimates from the recent GDP release indicate that equipment and software investment in the third quarter moderated from the rapid pace recorded in the first half of the year.
One data point does not make a trend, but an improvement in business investment will be important if the pickup in productivity growth that we have seen in recent quarters is to be sustained.
As for the economic outlook, in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) released in September, participants had a median projection for real GDP growth of 3.1 percent in 2018 and 2-1/2 percent in 2019.
The unemployment rate was expected to decline to 3‑1/2 percent next year.
With a robust labor market and inflation at or close to our 2 percent inflation goal and based on the baseline economic outlook for 2019 I have just laid out, I believe monetary policy at this stage of the economic expansion should be aimed at sustaining growth and maximum employment at levels consistent with our inflation objective.
At this stage of the interest rate cycle, I believe it will be especially important to monitor a wide range of data as we continually assess and calibrate whether the path for the policy rate is consistent with meeting our dual-mandate objectives on a sustained basis.
Data Dependence of Monetary Policy: What It Means and Why It Is Important
Economic research suggests that monetary policy should be "data dependent."3 And, indeed, central banks around the world, including the Federal Reserve, often describe their policies in this way.
I would now like to discuss how I think about two distinct roles that data dependence should play in the formulation and communication of monetary policy.
It is important to state up-front that data dependence is not, in and of itself, a monetary policy strategy.
A monetary policy strategy must find a way to combine incoming data and a model of the economy with a healthy dose of judgment--and humility!--to formulate, and then communicate, a path for the policy rate most consistent with our policy objectives.
In the case of the Fed, those objectives are assigned to us by the Congress, and they are to achieve maximum employment and price stability.
Importantly, because households and firms must make long-term saving and investment decisions and because these decisions‑‑directly or indirectly‑‑depend on the expected future path for the policy rate, the central bank should find a way to communicate and explain how incoming data are or are not changing the expected path for the policy rate consistent with best meeting its objectives.4 Absent such communication, inefficient divergences between public expectations and central bank intentions for the policy rate path can emerge and persist in ways that are costly to the economy when reversed.
Within this general framework, let me now consider two distinct ways in which I think that the path for the federal funds rate should be data dependent.
monetary policy has for some time and will, I believe, continue to be data dependent in the sense that incoming data reveal at the time of each Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting where the economy is at the time of each meeting relative to the goals of monetary policy.
This information on where the economy is relative to the goals of monetary policy is an important input into the policy decision.
If, for example, incoming data in the months ahead were to reveal that inflation and inflation expectations are running higher than projected at present and in ways that are inconsistent with our 2 percent objective, then I would be receptive to increasing the policy rate by more than I currently expect will be necessary.
Data dependence in this sense is easy to understand, as it is of the type implied by a large family of policy rules in which the parameters of the economy are known.5
But what if key parameters that describe the long-run destination of the economy are unknown? This is indeed the relevant case that the FOMC and other monetary policymakers face in practice.
The two most important unknown parameters needed to conduct‑‑and communicate‑‑monetary policy are the rate of unemployment consistent with maximum employment, u*, and the riskless real rate of interest consistent with price stability, r*.
As a result, in the real world, monetary policy should, I believe, be data dependent in a second sense: that incoming data can reveal at each FOMC meeting signals that will enable it to update its estimates of r* and u* in order to obtain its best estimate of where the economy is heading.6 And, indeed, as indicated by the SEP, FOMC participants have, over the past nearly seven years, revised their estimates of both u* and r* substantially lower as unemployment fell and real interest rates remained well below prior estimates of neutral without the rise in inflation or inflation expectations those earlier estimates would have predicted.
And these revisions to u* and r* almost certainly did have an important influence on the path for the policy rate that was actually realized in recent years.7 I would expect to revise my estimates of r* and u* as appropriate if incoming data on future inflation and unemployment diverge materially and persistently from my baseline projections today.
What does this mean for the conduct of monetary policy? As the economy has moved to a neighborhood consistent with the Fed's dual-mandate objectives, risks have become more symmetric and less skewed to the downside than when the current rate cycle began three years ago.
Raising rates too quickly could unnecessarily shorten the economic expansion, while moving too slowly could result in rising inflation and inflation expectations down the road that could be costly to reverse, as well as potentially pose financial stability risks.
Although the real federal funds rate today is just below the range of longer-run estimates presented in the September SEP, it is much closer to the vicinity of r* than it was when the FOMC started to remove accommodation in December 2015.
As I have already stressed, r* and u* are uncertain, and I believe we should continue to update our estimates of them as new data arrive.
This process of learning about r* and u* as new data arrive supports the case for gradual policy normalization, as it will allow the Fed to accumulate more information from the data about the ultimate destination for the policy rate and the unemployment rate at a time when inflation is close to our 2 percent objective.
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants.
I am most grateful to Brian Doyle and Edward Nelson of the Federal Reserve Board staff for their assistance in preparing this text.
Taylor (1993), "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.
See also Richard Clarida, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (1999), "The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective," Journal of Economic Literature, vol.
1661-707; Richard Clarida, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000), "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
147-80; Michael Woodford (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press); and Lars E.O.
Svensson (2015), "Forward Guidance," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
For example, long-term bond yields can be written as the sum of the expected path of the policy rate plus a term premium.
The exchange rate between two countries can be written as the sum of the policy rate path differential between two countries plus a risk premium.
So even for households and firms that do not directly care about the policy rate path, they do care about long-term bond yields and exchange rates that reflect this path.
See the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), Monetary Policy Report (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, July), pp.
37-41, or the webpage "Monetary Policy Principles and Practice" available on the Federal Reserve Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/monetary-policy-principles-and-practice.htm for a discussion of the policy rate paths implied by five different policy rules using parameter values typically assumed in the literature.
If the economy can be described by a linear model in which the only two unknown parameters are r* and u* and the shocks that hit the economy are normal, Kalman filtering can be used to derive a closed form mathematical expression for how to update one's estimate of r* and u* as new macro data arrive.
But, in practice, "the" model of the economy is neither known, nor linear, and the shocks that strike it are not normal.
Thus, monetary policy in practice is, of necessity, as much or more an art than a science.
Yellen (2017), "The Economic Outlook and the Conduct of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford University, Stanford, Calif., January 19.

At "An International Perspective on the Future of Bank Stress Testing" Symposium sponsored by Harvard Law School Program on International Financial Systems, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Professor Scott, and our hosts from Harvard and the Program on International Financial Systems, thank you for the chance to participate in today's meeting.
Looking around the room, I see a mix of past and current colleagues, from academics, to supervisors and central bankers, to researchers and practitioners in industry.
All of you have seen, felt, and lived different aspects of the transition to the post-crisis regulatory framework, and I am grateful to hear your perspectives on such a critical aspect of it.
In the depths of the financial crisis, the first regulatory stress tests were designed under intense scrutiny with high-stakes consequences.
Their contribution--an independent public view of the capital adequacy of the largest firms--helped reinforce the banking system at a critical juncture.
Since then, stress testing has meaningfully increased the post-stress resiliency of large financial institutions, and become a critical tool in keeping the system strong.
Today, I will review some of our efforts along those lines, focusing on proposed changes to our stress-testing program.
These changes, which I described in more detail in remarks last week, are intended to improve the program, maintaining its dynamism and flexibility while providing adequate notice to regulated firms, without altering materially the stringency of the tests or the overall level of capital in the system.1
I share these views with a deep appreciation of the decades of international experience represented in this room.
The crisis came with a reminder that the financial system is global, that risks in one country can quickly spread to another, and that in keeping the system and the economy safe, we have no choice but to work together.
I look forward to hearing your thoughts on the changes I outline, and on how to improve our stress testing processes in the years ahead.
Many of you are familiar with the Federal Reserve's proposed stress capital buffer (SCB), which would replace the current fixed buffer requirement of 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets with one based on each firm's stress test results.2 I believe the proposal represents an important milestone in crafting an integrated capital regime, and in keeping with its importance, we have received extensive and thoughtful public comments, identifying elements of it that could benefit from further refinement.
I described several of these elements last week, including my views on some areas which I believe we should revisit: improving measurement of risks in the trading book; encouraging less sticky forms of capital distribution without requiring dividend pre-funding; and reevaluating the interaction of the capital buffer with capital distributions.
Foremost among these is the volatility of stress test results.
Some volatility in annual results is necessary to preserve the dynamism of the stress test, and to reflect changes in macroeconomic conditions, salient economic risks, and the composition of firm balance sheets.
However, when the largest banks in the system are fully meeting their capital requirements, a highly variable capital requirement from year to year can present a significant management challenge.
I believe there is an important balance to strike in this area, which will let us preserve dynamism while reducing volatility, and we plan to seek comment on a relevant proposal in the not-too-distant future.
The second is the sequencing of stress test results with capital plan submissions.
Currently, and under the SCB proposal, a firm must decide whether to increase or decrease its planned dividends and share repurchases for the upcoming year without knowledge of a key constraint: the results of the stress test.
Initially, this phasing reflected the view that firms should think rigorously about their capital uses and needs, rather than relying primarily on the results of the supervisory stress test to guide those plans.
However, now that we all have several years' experience with this system, firms have told us that they would be able to engage in more thoughtful capital planning if they had knowledge of that year's stress test results before finalizing their distribution plans for the upcoming year.
I am sympathetic to their concerns, and will ask the Board to adjust the operation of the rule, so that firms know their SCB before they decide on their planned distributions for the coming year.
Of course, we expect firms to continue to maintain robust stress testing practices and use those results to inform their capital distribution plans, and we will continue to use the supervisory process to reinforce this expectation.
As the Federal Reserve has long maintained, leverage requirements are intended to serve as a backstop to the risk-based capital requirements.
Thus, I am concerned that explicitly assigning a leverage buffer requirement to a firm on the basis of risk-sensitive post-stress estimates runs afoul of the intellectual underpinnings of the leverage ratio, and I would advocate removing this element of the stress capital buffer regime.
Of course, leverage ratios, including the enhanced supplementary leverage requirements, would remain a critical part of our regulatory capital regime, and we will maintain the supervisory expectation that firms have sufficient capital to meet all minimum regulatory requirements.
I expect that the first SCB would not go into effect before 2020, and that CCAR will remain in place in 2019 for firms with over $250 billion in assets or that are otherwise complex.
However, we will consider whether we can move forward with any aspects of the SCB proposal for CCAR 2019, such as assumptions related to balance sheet growth, and I will ask the Board to exempt firms with less than $250 billion in assets from the CCAR quantitative assessment and supervisory stress testing in 2019.
In the meantime, several initiatives are also underway to provide additional transparency into stress testing.
I expect you will soon see the Federal Reserve issue a policy statement describing governing principles around the supervisory stress testing process--and with it, a commitment to disclosing additional detail about supervisory stress test models and results, along with portfolios of hypothetical loans and associated loss rates.
I also expect the Board will seek comment on the advisability of, and possible approaches to, gathering public input on scenarios and salient risks facing the banking system each year.
Transparency matters not only because it provides additional due process to affected participants; it also creates an opportunity for broader, more insightful comments from the public.
However, we want to maintain incentives for firms to conduct their own stress tests rigorously and thoughtfully, and avoid the risk that firms will use this new information to engage in transactions that are solely designed to reduce losses in the test without reducing actual risk.
Firms have indicated that additional disclosure about models would not affect their own stress tests.
We expect them to make good on that representation, as the Federal Reserve's stress test is not, and cannot be, a full picture of a firm's resiliency in light of its idiosyncratic risks.
We are confident that we can address these concerns through the regular examination process, by closely monitoring changes in firms' portfolios and ensuring sufficient capital, controls, and governance in light of the risk characteristics of their activities.
I also want to reiterate a point regarding the role of the qualitative objection.
The Federal Reserve eliminated this element of CCAR for large and noncomplex firms in 2017, in part because of improvements in risk management at those firms.3 In my view, the time has come to normalize the CCAR qualitative assessment by removing the public objection tool, and continuing to evaluate firms' stress testing practices through normal supervision.
While supervisory assessments would continue to center on a firm's capital plan submissions, examination work would continue on a year-round basis, taking into account the firm's management of other financial risks, and culminating in a rating of the firm's capital position and planning.
Firms with deficient practices would receive supervisory findings through the examination process, and would be at risk of a ratings downgrade or enforcement action if those deficiencies were sufficiently material.
These changes are aimed at preserving the foundation laid over nearly a decade of stress testing experience, including by many of the people in this room.
Our goal is to bolster the program's credibility by increasing its transparency, simplicity, and stability, while maintaining the strength of the supervisory and internal stress testing elements that are central to the program today.
These adjustments will be coupled with our continued commitment to strong supervision, and our expectation that financial institutions manage their risks and hold sufficient capital to continue operations through times of stress.
Quarles (2018), "A New Chapter in Stress Testing," speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, DC, November 9.
Amendments to the Regulatory Capital, Capital Plan, and Stress Test Rules (PDF), 83 Fed.
The capital planning evaluation remains as part of the normal supervisory process for these firms.

Although it is still early days, it is already evident that the application of artificial intelligence (AI) in financial services is potentially quite important and merits our attention.
Through our Fintech working group, we are working across the Federal Reserve System to take a deliberate approach to understanding the potential implications of AI for financial services, particularly as they relate to our responsibilities.
In light of the potential importance of AI, we are seeking to learn from industry, banks, consumer advocates, researchers, and others, including through today's conference.
Due to an early commitment to open-source principles, AI algorithms from some of the largest companies are available to even nascent startups.4 As for processing power, continuing innovation by public cloud providers means that with only a laptop and a credit card, it is possible to tap into some of the world's most powerful computing systems by paying only for usage time, without having to build out substantial hardware infrastructure.
Whereas in 2013 it was estimated that 90 percent of the world's data had been created in the prior two years, by 2016, IBM estimated that 90 percent of global data had been created in the prior year alone.6
The best AI result on a popular image recognition challenge improved from a 26 percent error rate to 3.5 percent in just four years.
That is lower than the human error rate of 5 percent.7 In one study, a combination AI-human approach brought the error rate down even further--to 0.5 percent.
So it is no surprise that many financial services firms are devoting so much money, attention, and time to developing and using AI approaches.
Broadly, there is particular interest in at least five capabilities.8 First, firms view AI approaches as potentially having superior ability for pattern recognition, such as identifying relationships among variables that are not intuitive or not revealed by more traditional modeling.
Second, firms see potential cost efficiencies where AI approaches may be able to arrive at outcomes more cheaply with no reduction in performance.
Third, AI approaches might have greater accuracy in processing because of their greater automation compared to approaches that have more human input and higher "operator error." Fourth, firms may see better predictive power with AI compared to more traditional approaches--for instance, in improving investment performance or expanding credit access.
What do those capabilities mean in terms of how we bank? The Financial Stability Board highlighted four areas where AI could impact banking.9 First, customer-facing uses could combine expanded consumer data sets with new algorithms to assess credit quality or price insurance policies.
Second, there is the potential for strengthening back-office operations, such as advanced models for capital optimization, model risk management, stress testing, and market impact analysis.
Finally, there are likely to be AI advancements in compliance and risk mitigation by banks.
AI solutions are already being used by some firms in areas like fraud detection, capital optimization, and portfolio management.
The potential breadth and power of these new AI applications inevitably raise questions about potential risks to bank safety and soundness, consumer protection, or the financial system.10 The question, then, is how should we approach regulation and supervision? It is incumbent on regulators to review the potential consequences of AI, including the possible risks, and take a balanced view about its use by supervised firms.
Regulation and supervision need to be thoughtfully designed so that they ensure risks are appropriately mitigated but do not stand in the way of responsible innovations that might expand access and convenience for consumers and small businesses or bring greater efficiency, risk detection, and accuracy.
Likewise, it is important not to drive responsible innovation away from supervised institutions and toward less regulated and more opaque spaces in the financial system.11
Our existing regulatory and supervisory guardrails are a good place to start as we assess the appropriate approach for AI processes.
The National Science and Technology Council, in an extensive study addressing regulatory activity generally, concludes that if an AI-related risk "falls within the bounds of an existing regulatory regime, .
the policy discussion should start by considering whether the existing regulations already adequately address the risk, or whether they need to be adapted to the addition of AI."12 A recent report by the U.S.
With respect to banking services, a few generally applicable laws, regulations, guidance, and supervisory approaches appear particularly relevant to the use of AI tools.
First, the Federal Reserve's "Guidance on Model Risk Management" (SR Letter 11-7) highlights the importance to safety and soundness of embedding critical analysis throughout the development, implementation, and use of models, which include complex algorithms like AI.14 It also underscores "effective challenge" of models by a "second set of eyes"--unbiased, qualified individuals separated from the model's development, implementation, and use.
It describes supervisory expectations for sound independent review of a firm's own models to confirm they are fit for purpose and functioning as intended.
Similarly, when our own examiners evaluate model risk, they generally begin with an evaluation of the processes firms have for developing and reviewing models, as well as the response to any shortcomings in a model or the ability to review it.
Banks can use such models, but the guidance highlights the importance of using other tools to cabin or otherwise mitigate the risk of an unexplained or opaque model.
Second, our guidance on vendor risk management (SR 13-19/CA 13-21), along with the prudential regulators' guidance on technology service providers, highlights considerations firms should weigh when outsourcing business functions or activities--and could be expected to apply as well to AI-based tools or services that are externally sourced.15 The vast majority of the banks that we supervise will have to rely on the expertise, data, and off-the-shelf AI tools of nonbank vendors to take advantage of AI-powered processes.
Whether these tools are chatbots, anti-money-laundering/know your customer compliance products, or new credit evaluation tools, it seems likely that they would be classified as services to the bank.
The vendor risk-management guidance discusses best practices for supervised firms regarding due diligence, selection, and contracting processes in selecting an outside vendor.
It also describes ways that firms can provide oversight and monitoring throughout the relationship with the vendor, and considerations about business continuity and contingencies for a firm to consider before the termination of any such relationship.
Third, it is important to emphasize that guidance has to be read in the context of the relative risk and importance of the specific use-case in question.
We have long taken a risk-focused supervisory approach--the level of scrutiny should be commensurate with the potential risk posed by the approach, tool, model, or process used.16 That principle also applies generally to the attention that supervised firms devote to the different approaches they use: firms should apply more care and caution to a tool they use for major decisions or that could have a material impact on consumers, compliance, or safety and soundness.
Accordingly, we would expect firms to apply robust analysis and prudent risk management and controls to AI tools, as they do in other areas, as well as to monitor potential changes and ongoing developments.
For example, let's take the areas of fraud prevention and cybersecurity, where supervised institutions may need their own AI tools to identify and combat outside AI-powered threats.
Supervised institutions will likely need tools that are just as powerful and adaptable as the threats that they are designed to face, which likely entails some degree of opacity.
While so far, most phishing attacks against consumers have relied on standard-form emails, likely due to the high cost of personalization, in the future, AI tools could be used to make internet fraud and phishing highly personalized.17 By accessing data sets with consumers' personally identifiable information and applying open-source AI tools, a phisher may be able to churn out highly targeted emails to millions of consumers at relatively low cost, containing personalized information such as their bank account number and logo, along with past transactions.18 In cases such as this, where large data sets and AI tools may be used for malevolent purposes, it may be that AI is the best tool to fight AI.
Let's turn to the related issue of the proverbial "black box"--the potential lack of explainability associated with some AI approaches.
In the banking sector, it is not uncommon for there to be questions as to what level of understanding a bank should have of its vendors' models, due to the balancing of risk management, on the one hand, and protection of proprietary information, on the other.
But AI can introduce additional complexity because many AI tools and models develop analysis, arrive at conclusions, or recommend decisions that may be hard to explain.
The challenge of explainability can translate into a higher level of uncertainty about the suitability of an AI approach, all else equal.
So how does, or even can, a firm assess the use of an approach it might not fully understand? To a large degree, this will depend on the capacity in which AI is used and the risks presented.
The potential for the application of AI tools to result in new benefits to consumers is garnering a lot of attention.
The opportunity to access services through innovative channels or processes can be a potent way to advance financial inclusion.20 Consider, for instance, consumer credit scoring.
There are longstanding and well-documented concerns that many consumers are burdened by material errors on their credit reports, lack sufficient credit reporting information necessary for a score, or have credit reports that are unscorable.21 As noted earlier, banks and other financial service providers are using AI to develop credit-scoring models that take into account factors beyond the usual metrics.
There is substantial interest in the potential for those new models to allow more consumers on the margins of the current credit system to improve their credit standing, at potentially lower cost.
As noted earlier, AI also has the potential to allow creditors to more accurately model and price risk, and to bring greater speed to decisions.
AI may offer new consumer benefits, but it is not immune from fair lending and other consumer protection risks, and compliance with fair lending and other consumer protection laws is important.22 Of course, it should not be assumed that AI approaches are free of bias simply because they are automated and rely less on direct human intervention.
A 2016 Treasury Department report noted that while "data-driven algorithms may expedite credit assessments and reduce costs, they also carry the risk of disparate impact in credit outcomes and the potential for fair lending violations."23
A recent example illustrates the risk of unwittingly introducing bias into an AI model.
Because the pool of previously hired software developers in the training data set was overwhelmingly male, the AI developed a bias against female applicants, going so far as to exclude resumes of graduates from two women's colleges.24
Importantly, the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) and the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) include requirements for creditors to provide notice of the factors involved in taking actions that are adverse or unfavorable for the consumer.25 These requirements help provide transparency in the underwriting process, promote fair lending by requiring creditors to explain why they reached their decisions, and provide consumers with actionable information to improve their credit standing.
However, the opacity of some AI tools may make it challenging to explain credit decisions to consumers, which would make it harder for consumers to improve their credit score by changing their behavior.
Fortunately, AI itself may play a role in the solution: The AI community is responding with important advances in developing "explainable" AI tools with a focus on expanding consumer access to credit.26 I am pleased that this is one of the topics on your agenda today.
Perhaps one of the most important early lessons is that not all potential consequences are knowable now--firms should be continually vigilant for new issues in the rapidly evolving area of AI.
Further, firms should not assume that AI approaches are less susceptible to problems because they are purported to be able to "learn" or less prone to human error.
It is important for firms to recognize the possible pitfalls and employ sound controls now to prevent and mitigate possible future problems.
We welcome discussion about what use cases banks and other financial services firms are exploring with AI approaches and other innovations, and how our existing laws, regulations, guidance, and policy interests may intersect with these new approaches.
27 When considering financial innovation of any type, our task is to facilitate an environment in which socially beneficial, responsible innovation can progress with appropriate mitigation of risk and consistent with applicable statutes and regulations.
As we move ahead in exploring the policy and regulatory issues related to artificial intelligence, we look forward to collaborating with a broad array of stakeholders.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Executive Office of the President, Preparing for the Future of Artificial Intelligence; and Financial Stability Board, Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning in Financial Services (PDF) (Basel: Financial Stability Board, November 1, 2017).
AI tools are also likely to be useful for central banks and regulators in their responsibilities for supervision, financial stability, and monetary policy, although this is not addressed here.
The 2017 Financial Stability Board report highlighted the potential use of AI tools by central banks and prudential authorities for applications ranging from systemic risk identification to detecting fraud and money laundering (Financial Stability Board, Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning).
Department of the Treasury, A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities (PDF) (Washington: U.S.
Department of the Treasury, June 3, 2018); Brainard, "Where Do Consumers Fit in the Fintech Stack?"; and American Bankers Association, "Understanding Artificial Intelligence." Return to text
See, e.g., Financial Stability Board, Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning and National Consumers Law Center (on behalf of its low-income clients), California Reinvestment Coalition Consumer Action, Consumers Union, National Association of Consumer Advocates, U.S.
PIRG, Woodstock Institute, World Privacy Forum, "Comments in Response to Request for Information Regarding Use of Alternative Data and Modeling Techniques in the Credit Process," Docket No.
Department of the Treasury, A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities; and Carol A.
Lael Brainard, "Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack?" (speech at the Northwestern Kellogg Public-Private Interface Conference, April 28, 2017).
Department of the Treasury, A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Guidance on Model Risk Management," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR Letter 11-7 (April 4, 2011).
Recall, that viability requires that the scammer actually extract money from the victim: those who are fooled for a while, but then figure it out, or who balk at the last hurdle are precisely the expensive false positives that the scammer must deter.") Return to text
In a 2017 request for public comment, the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection noted that alternative modeling techniques may offer consumer benefits, such as greater credit access, enhanced creditworthiness predictions, lower costs, and better service and convenience, but also highlighted consumer risks, such as privacy concerns, data quality issues, loss of the ability to correct errors, and discrimination.
See Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, "Request for Information Regarding Use of Alternative Data and Modeling Techniques in the Credit Process (PDF)," (Washington: Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, February 14, 2017), Return to text
See, e.g., Lael Brainard, "FinTech and the Search for Full Stack Financial Inclusion," (speech at the Conference on FinTech, Financial Inclusion, and the Potential to Transform Financial Services at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, October 17, 2018).
Federal Trade Commission, "In FTC Study, Five Percent of Consumers Had Errors on Their Credit Reports That Could Result in Less Favorable Terms for Loans," news release, (February 11, 2013); Federal Trade Commission, "FTC Issues Follow-Up Study on Credit Report Accuracy," news release, (January 21, 2015); and Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, Data Point: Credit Invisibles (PDF) (Washington: Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, May 2015).
The primary federal statutes governing fair lending are the Equal Credit Opportunity Act (ECOA) and the Fair Housing Act (FHA).
Department of the Treasury, "Opportunities and Challenges in Online Marketplace Lending (PDF)" (Washington: U.S.
See, e.g., Nanette Byrnes, "An AI-Fueled Credit Formula Might Help You Get a Loan," MIT Technology Review (February 14, 2017), https://www.technologyreview.com/s/603604/an-ai-fueled-credit-formula-might-help-you-get-a-loan/.
Department of the Treasury, A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities; Brainard, "Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack?"; and Lael Brainard, "The Opportunities and Challenges of Fintech" (speech at the Conference on Financial Innovation at the Board of Governors, Washington, December 2, 2016).

It is an honor and pleasure to talk to you about the next chapter in stress testing, particularly before this extremely distinguished audience of Brookings scholars that includes former Chairs, Vice Chairs, and senior leaders of the Federal Reserve who did the hard foundational work of developing and implementing this new approach to the assessment of bank resiliency.
In these circumstances, my discussing changes to our stress testing regime could sound uncomfortably close to the serene arrogance of Alfonso X of Castile, who famously said that "Had I been present at the creation, I would have given some useful hints for the better ordering of the universe." My thoughts today, however, are not a call to rewrite Genesis, but rather a recognition that our stress testing regime--like the banking and financial system that it evaluates--will and should evolve as we continue to learn from experience in the management of this tool.
In the best traditions of the Federal Reserve, this evolution should be grounded in rigorous analysis of the facts and a commitment to continual improvement of our methods.
In my remarks today, I will begin with what has been successful about the stress tests and why those elements should remain.
I will then spend some time discussing some of the changes we have proposed to our stress testing program, and how we are now thinking about moving forward with those changes.
And last, I will close with some thoughts on the "qualitative" element of our stress testing program.
The adjustments I will discuss are intended to increase both the transparency and the efficiency of the stress testing regime.
Enhanced transparency goes to the very core of democratic accountability and the rights of all U.S.
citizens--including the management and shareholders of the institutions that are subject to the stress tests--to understand the requirements to which they are subject.
Let me begin with a short discussion of the core elements of our stress testing program.
As you know, one of the most visible aspects of our stress testing program is that the firms and the public receive an independent view of the capital adequacy of the largest banks.
But the stress test conducted by the Federal Reserve is only one part of our stress testing regime.
Just as important, we require each firm to run its own stress test, using its own models and a stressful scenario that reflects the firm's assessment of its idiosyncratic risks and key vulnerabilities.
Underpinning a firm's stress test is the firm's ability to identify and measure risks under normal and stressful conditions and the strength of the firm's internal processes, and we use the supervisory process to ensure that the firms' stress testing practices employ sound methodologies.
The combination of the Federal Reserve's common yardstick, the firm's own stress tests, and supervisory oversight over the firms' practices has resulted in a meaningful increase in the post-stress resiliency of large financial institutions.
Further, the changes I'll speak about today are not intended to alter materially the overall level of capital in the system or the stringency of the regime.
economy relies on a strong, well-capitalized banking system that can weather stressful events and continue lending to households and businesses.
banking organizations subject to the 2018 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR)--the Fed's evaluation of capital adequacy for large holding companies--have increased the dollar amount of their common equity tier 1 (CET1) capital from around $500 billion in 2009 to more than $1.2 trillion as of the second quarter of this year, and have more than doubled CET1 risk-based capital ratios from approximately 5 percent to over 12 percent over the same period.
While the regime has been successful overall, I believe it is prudent to review all our practices to ensure that they are as efficient and transparent as possible and that they remain appropriate in light of changes in the industry that have been achieved.
For instance, as firms become more resilient, they may no longer need to build capital to support their current level of risk taking, but rather move into the mode of retaining the capital they have already built.
Firms have also significantly improved their risk management, providing room to adjust our approach to assessing capital planning practices.
Finally, as we make changes to our regime, the issue of volatility in the stress test results becomes more pronounced.
As I'll discuss, we are considering how to balance the need to preserve the dynamism in stress testing with the need to ensure that firms have sufficient notice regarding the capital requirements to which they are held.
Many of you are familiar with the Federal Reserve's proposal to integrate the stress test with the regulatory capital rule--known as the stress capital buffer (SCB).1 I believe the SCB proposal represents an important milestone as we enter the next chapter of our stress testing regime.
For those who are not familiar with the SCB, let me provide a little background about how our capital rule currently works, and how it would be modified by the SCB.
As devoted readers of our capital rules may know, our regulatory capital rule includes both minimum capital requirements and a buffer that sits on top of those minimum requirements.
The buffer serves as an early warning to a firm and to supervisors, and it requires the firm to reduce its capital distributions as the firm approaches the minimum requirements.
Under the current capital rule, all firms are subject to a fixed buffer requirement of 2.5 percent of risk-weighted assets--the largest firms are also subject to a global systemically important bank surcharge and potential countercyclical capital buffer.
For large firms, the SCB would replace the fixed 2.5 percent risk-based buffer with a firm-specific buffer the size of which would be based on the firm's stress test results.
In this way, we are integrating the automatic restrictions on capital distributions in the current capital rule with the output of the most dynamic tool we have for assessing risk--the stress test--to create a more robust and dynamic regulatory capital regime.
The SCB would also result in a more transparent and simplified system of regulatory capital requirements, because a firm will be held to a single, integrated capital regime.
When we made our SCB proposal last April, we had aimed to make the SCB final for the 2019 stress test cycle.
For 2019, I expect CCAR will remain in place for firms with over $250 billion in assets or that are otherwise complex; however, we will consider whether we can move forward with any aspects of the SCB proposal for CCAR 2019, such as assumptions related to balance sheet growth.
I will also ask the Board to exempt firms with less than $250 billion in assets from the CCAR quantitative assessment and supervisory stress testing in 2019 in light of the every-other-year cycle contemplated in the tailoring proposal that the Board approved two weeks ago.2
Returning to the SCB proposal, I would like to give you a sense of the comments we received and our approach to addressing those concerns.
The issue foremost on my mind is the volatility of the stress test results.
One concern frequently expressed is that the results of the supervisory stress test can lead to capital requirements that change significantly from year to year, which limits a firm's ability to manage its capital effectively.
Some amount of volatility is necessary to preserve the dynamism of the stress test--by nature, the stress test will differ year-over-year based on macroeconomic conditions and contemporary understanding of salient risks in the economy.
In addition, the stress test results are sensitive to changes in a firm's balance sheet, which means that a firm's capital requirements will evolve as the firm's activities and exposure evolve.
However, I do think there is an important balance to be struck between preserving this dynamism and ensuring that firms have sufficient notice regarding the capital requirements to which they are held.
In the first years after the financial crisis, as the banking system was dramatically ramping up the total amount of capital in the system, this volatility was less of a management problem: until we reached reasonably full capitalization, each year every bank needed to increase its capital.
At the current juncture, however, both our system as a whole and each of the largest banks in that system are fully meeting their capital requirements.
In these circumstances, having a highly variable capital requirement presents a significant management challenge.
We are considering ways of preserving the dynamism of stress testing while reducing its volatility, and plan to seek comment on a proposal in this area in the not-too-distant future.
In addition, we are also exploring ways of improving our approach to measuring risks in the trading book.
Firms' trading books are dynamic and complex, as firms hold both long and short positions.
Many have noted that a single market shock does not adequately capture risks in firms' trading book, and we agree with those comments.
We are exploring ways to incorporate multiple market shocks in our stress test without adding volatility to the results and without increasing the compliance burden.
Currently, and under the SCB proposal, a firm must decide whether to increase or decrease its planned dividends and share repurchases for the upcoming year without knowledge of a key constraint: the results of the stress test.
In other words, we require a firm to give us a formal plan for dividends and stock repurchases without knowing what its effective capital requirement is.
If it guesses wrong, it could be publicly shamed for failing the stress test (if its dividends are too high relative to capital), or penalized in the markets for inadequate distribution of income (if its dividends are too low relative to capital).
Now, while this might at first blush appear to be pointless and obdurate cruelty, the reasoning behind the practice was initially perfectly sensible: it reflected the view that firms should think rigorously about their capital uses and needs in developing their capital distribution plans, rather than rely primarily on the results of the supervisory stress test to guide those plans.
Now that we all have several years' experience with this system, however, firms have told us that they would be able to engage in more thoughtful capital planning if they had knowledge of that year's stress test results before finalizing their distribution plans for the upcoming year.
I am sympathetic to their concerns, and will ask the Board to adjust the operation of the rule so that firms know their SCB before they decide on their planned distributions for the coming year.
This adjustment in sequence will also help firms manage volatility in the SCB.
We expect firms to continue to maintain robust stress testing practices and use those results to inform their capital distribution plans, and we will continue to use the supervisory process to reinforce this expectation.
The comments also highlighted an issue with how the capital buffers operate today, which is amplified by the inherent volatility of the SCB.
As I noted earlier, a firm operating in its capital buffer is required to reduce its capital distributions so that it can build capital over time.
By design, the buffer was intended to apply increasingly stringent limitations as the firm's capital ratios decline.
But, in our current world in which a healthy and profitable banking system is seeking to maintain its capital levels rather than continue to increase them, a bank will appropriately and safely tend to distribute much or all of its income in any given year.
In that case, the operation of the buffer would not result in a proportional restriction of income as the firm's capital eases, but could be a sudden cessation of all dividends if the firm dips into the buffer by even a small amount, even if the changes in its capital levels are quite minor.
First, the SCB proposal would have included four quarters of dividends in a firm's SCB, in recognition of the fact that firms experience market pressure to hold dividends constant, even under stress.
As the Federal Reserve has long maintained, leverage requirements are intended to serve as a backstop to the risk-based capital requirements.
Thus, I am concerned that explicitly assigning a leverage buffer requirement to a firm on the basis of risk-sensitive post-stress estimates runs afoul of the intellectual underpinnings of the leverage ratio, and I would advocate removing this element of the stress capital buffer regime.
Of course, leverage ratios, including the enhanced supplementary leverage requirements, would remain a critical part of our regulatory capital regime, and we will maintain the supervisory expectation that firms have sufficient capital to meet all minimum regulatory requirements.
Together, the adjustments we are contemplating to the SCB offer promise in improving the efficiency, coherence, and transparency of the regulatory capital regime while maintaining the overall level of capital in the system and the core principles of the regime that have proven successful.
That being said, we welcome a continued dialogue with the public as we implement these changes, and through that implementation, we will ensure that we maintain the incentives for effective stress testing practices that exist today.
Transparency of the stress test and its inputs and outputs is key to the credibility of the stress test, and there are several initiatives underway to provide additional transparency regarding the supervisory stress test models and scenario design process.
We believe that the adjustments under development strike the right balance of advancing transparency, while maintaining incentives for firms to think critically about their own risks.
I expect that soon you will see the Federal Reserve issue a policy statement describing governing principles around the supervisory stress testing process.
As a part of that statement, I would expect a commitment to disclose additional detail about supervisory stress test models and results and to publish portfolios of hypothetical loans and associated loss rates.
I expect that we will begin providing some of this additional detail starting in early 2019, and that these changes will allow firms to benchmark the results of their own models against those of the supervisory models.
We are currently considering options to provide additional transparency regarding scenarios and scenario design and I expect that the Board will seek comment on the advisability of, and possible approaches to, gathering the public's input on scenarios and salient risks facing the banking system each year.
Additional transparency regarding the stress test scenarios serves multiple purposes: it both provides additional due process to affected participants, and provides additional sources of insight--including from academics and thought leaders like many of you in this room--that could be used to inform a given year's scenario.
As we develop proposals, a key consideration is to ensure that we maintain incentives for firms to conduct their own stress tests rigorously and thoughtfully.
Firms have indicated that additional disclosure about models would not affect their own stress tests.
We expect them to make good on that representation, as the Federal Reserve's stress test is not, and cannot be, a full picture of a firm's resiliency in light of its idiosyncratic risks.
For example, there is some risk that firms will use knowledge from additional transparency about the stress test to engage in transactions that are solely designed to reduce losses in the test, but that do not truly reduce risk in their portfolios.
We will closely monitor changes in firms' portfolios and take appropriate actions to ensure firms are holding sufficient capital, and have sufficient controls and governance, in light of the risk characteristics of their activities.
Before I close, I would like to say a few words about the role of the qualitative objection in our new chapter of stress testing.
As originally conceived, CCAR had both a quantitative component--based on the supervisory stress test--and a qualitative component--based on the Federal Reserve's assessment of a firm's stress testing practices.
In 2017, the Federal Reserve eliminated the qualitative objection as part of CCAR for large and noncomplex firms, in part because of improvements in risk management at these firms.3 By incorporating supervisory stress testing into the regulatory capital regime and introducing an automatic penalty if a firm falls below its SCB-derived capital requirement, the SCB proposal will eliminate the quantitative objection from CCAR.
The natural next question is: has the CCAR qualitative objection for the largest firms also run its course?
In my view, the time has come to normalize the CCAR qualitative assessment by removing the public objection tool, and continuing to evaluate firms' stress testing practices through normal supervision.
In such an environment, firms would remain subject to the same supervisory expectations, and examiners would continue to conduct rigorous horizontal and firm-specific assessments of a firm's capital positions and capital planning, tailored to the risk profile of the firm.
While much of the examination work would center on a firm's capital plan submissions, examination work would continue on a year-round basis, taking into account the firm's management of other financial risks.
The evaluation of the firm's capital position and capital planning would culminate in a rating of the firm's capital position and planning.
Firms with deficient practices would receive supervisory findings through the examination process, and would be at risk of a ratings downgrade or enforcement action if those deficiencies were sufficiently material.
As we begin the next chapter in stress testing, my objective is to ensure the continued credibility of the program by increasing its transparency, simplicity, and stability while maintaining the strength of the supervisory and internal stress testing elements that are central to the program today.
These adjustments will be coupled with our continued commitment to strong supervision and our expectation that financial institutions ensure they are managing their risks and holding sufficient capital to continue operations through times of stress.
Amendments to the Regulatory Capital, Capital Plan, and Stress Test Rules (PDF), 83 Fed.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board invites public comment on framework that would more closely match regulations for large banking organizations with their risk profiles," news release, October 31, 2018.
The capital planning evaluation remains as part of the normal supervisory process for these firms.

I see some familiar faces in the audience, and I am delighted to be at Peterson today to offer my first public remarks since being sworn in last month as Vice Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board.
As some of you know, I have been a student of U.S.
So, for me, personally, it is a distinct honor and real privilege to have the opportunity to serve with my colleagues on the Board of Governors and, along with the 12 Reserve Bank presidents, on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).
Now, of course, I fully realize that I have participated in just one FOMC meeting to date, so my remarks today will not come with a patina earned from long experience as a monetary policymaker.
That said, I thought it might be of interest to share my thinking on the current state of the U.S.
economy, to explain how it informed my support for the FOMC's policy decision last month, and to discuss my views on the way forward for U.S.
economic expansion, now in its 10th year, is marked by strong growth in the gross domestic product (GDP) and a job market that has been surprising on the upside for nearly two years.
It is impossible today to know with much precision how much of the pickup in growth and the decline in unemployment that we have seen over the past two years is structural and how much is cyclical.
That said, based on my reading of the accumulating evidence, I believe that trend growth in the economy may well be faster and the structural rate of unemployment lower than I would have thought several years ago.
Recently revised Commerce Department data now show that the aggregate household saving rate is running at 6.7 percent of disposable income.
The higher level suggests that, in contrast to the previous economic expansion from 2001 to 2007, when households were borrowing to maintain consumption while income growth slowed, households today, at least in the aggregate, are well positioned to maintain or even increase consumption relative to gains in income.
To me, at this stage in the business cycle, a historically high household saving rate is a tailwind for the economy, not a headwind.
By contrast, at a comparable stage in both the 2001-07 and 1982-90 economic expansions, productivity growth (as measured by an eight-quarter moving average) was actually slowing relative to its contemporaneous peak-to-present pace.
I should also note that this recent pickup in productivity has coincided with a rebound in business investment, and that this increase in capital spending has been evident in both the equipment and intellectual property categories; it is not just an "oil patch" story.
Business investment is being supported by recent changes in the tax code that lower the cost of capital as well as by continued strong profitability of U.S.
While capital investment is one important source of productivity growth and recent data on this front are encouraging, predicting future‑‑or even identifying past‑‑inflection points in productivity growth is notoriously difficult.
Although it may be tempting simply to extrapolate a decade of disappointing productivity data into a distant future, a pickup in trend productivity growth is a possibility that deserves close monitoring.2
Let me now turn to the job market and inflation outlook.
Average monthly job gains continue to outpace the increase needed to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force over the longer run.
At 3.7 percent in September, the unemployment rate has not been this low since 1969.
In addition, after remaining stubbornly sluggish throughout much of the expansion, wage growth is picking up.
A sustained rise in inflation-adjusted, or "real," wages at or above the pace of productivity growth is typical in an economy operating in the vicinity of full employment, and we are starting to see some evidence of this.
expansions, gains in real wages in excess of productivity growth were not accompanied by a material rise in price inflation.
Of course, this time may be different, and as with growth, the job market could perform better or worse than the baseline outlook.
However, for now, the increase in wages has been broadly consistent with the pickup in productivity growth that I have just discussed, and a rise in the still-low rate of labor force participation among the prime-age population provides scope for the job market to strengthen further without generating inflationary pressures.
This outlook for the labor market also reflects my view that the structural, or longer-run, rate of unemployment‑‑that is, the unemployment rate consistent with stable inflation over the longer run--may be somewhat lower than I would have thought several years ago.
What this means is that, even with today's very low unemployment rate, the labor market might not be as tight‑‑and inflationary pressures not as strong‑‑as I once would have thought.
Over the past several years, most FOMC participants have been reducing their individual estimates of the longer-run level of the unemployment rate.
Outside estimates, such as those from the Congressional Budget Office and the Blue Chip Economic Indicators survey, show a similar pattern of downward revisions.
With unemployment falling and wage gains thus far in line with productivity and expected inflation, the traditional indicators of cost-push price pressure are not flashing red right now.
Both total and core personal consumption expenditure inflation are now running close to the FOMC's 2 percent objective.
When thinking about the inflation outlook, I pay attention to market-based measures of inflation compensation from the TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) market as well as to surveys of inflation expectations.
These "breakeven inflation rates" are simply the difference between yields on traditional Treasury securities and those on TIPS with comparable maturities.
While these market-based measures are not perfect and need to be adjusted for liquidity and term premium factors, they can provide a useful signal about market inflation expectations, which can be combined with signals from surveys of expected inflation to get a read on inflation expectations.
Breakeven inflation rates have only recently risen to a range that is in line‑‑but just barely‑‑with the expectation that inflation will remain close to our 2 percent inflation goal over the medium-to-longer run.
Survey-based measures of inflation expectations also appear consistent with the Fed's inflation goal.
In short, the labor market today is robust, and inflation is at or close to the Fed's 2 percent inflation goal.
Thus, the economy is as near as it has been in a decade to meeting both of the Fed's dual-mandate objectives, which suggests to me that monetary policy at this stage of the economic expansion should be aimed at sustaining growth and employment at levels consistent with keeping inflation at or close to the 2 percent rate consistent with price stability.
By contrast, until this year, the appropriate focus of policy had been to return employment and inflation to levels consistent with our dual-mandate objectives.
With the economy now operating at or close to mandate-consistent levels for inflation and unemployment, the risks that monetary policy must balance are now more symmetric and less skewed to the downside.
I supported the FOMC's decision last month to raise the target for the federal funds rate to a range of 2 to 2-1/4 percent.
With the economy growing briskly, the labor market operating in the vicinity of full employment, and inflation running close to 2 percent, I saw our decision as another step in removing the extraordinary degree of accommodation put in place in the aftermath of the Global Financial Crisis.
The funds rate is just now‑‑for the first time in a decade‑‑above the Fed's inflation objective, but the inflation-adjusted real funds rate remains below the range of estimates for the longer-run neutral real rate, often referred to as r*, computed from the projections submitted by Board members and the Reserve Bank presidents.
This longer-run r*, like the natural rate of unemployment, is both unobserved and time varying‑‑and thus must be inferred as a signal extracted from noisy macro and financial data.
The reason for this is because, as Milton Friedman argued in his classic American Economic Association presidential address, a central bank that seeks to consistently keep real interest rates below r* will eventually face rising inflation and inflation expectations, while a central bank that seeks to keep real interest rates above r* will eventually face falling inflation and inflation expectations.3 My own and others' research suggests that the failure of the Fed to respect this principle contributed to the Great Inflation of the 1970s, while the incorporation of this principle into Fed policy in the 1990s and 2000s contributed to the achievement of stable and low inflation during and since those years.4 So, even though estimates of r* are imprecise, I do not believe they should be ignored.
Instead, when thinking about monetary policy, I believe it is best not to ignore entirely an admittedly imprecise estimate of r* today, but instead to update that estimate as new data on inflation, inflation expectations, employment, growth, and productivity arrive.
Moreover, because monetary policy operates with a lag, and with inflation presently close to the 2 percent goal, it will be especially important to monitor inflation expectations closely‑‑using both surveys and financial market data‑‑to best calibrate the pace and destination for policy normalization.
It will also be important to monitor both model-based and financial-market‑based estimates of expected future inflation-indexed real interest rates (for example, 5-year real rates 5 years forward)‑‑suitably adjusted for term premium and liquidity effects‑‑as one indicator of longer-run r*.
Before the financial crisis, these 5-year real rates 5 years forward averaged around 2 percent after a term premium and liquidity adjustment.
Since 2015, they have averaged about 0.50 percent but recently have approached 0.75 percent, also after a term and liquidity premium adjustment.
Given that real interest rates and economic growth tend to move together over the longer run, one possible source of these upward revisions in forward real rates could be that financial market participants may have become more optimistic about the growth potential of our economy.
If the data come in as I expect, I believe that some further gradual adjustment in the federal funds rate will be appropriate.
As I mentioned earlier, I believe monetary policy today remains accommodative, and that, with the economy now operating at or close to mandate-consistent levels for inflation and unemployment, the risks that monetary policy must balance are now more symmetric and less skewed to the downside.
Raising rates too quickly could unnecessarily shorten the economic expansion while moving too slowly could result in rising inflation and inflation expectations down the road that could be costly to reverse.
As I calibrate, in the months ahead, the pace and ultimate destination for monetary policy adjustments that will best allow the Fed to achieve its dual-mandate objectives, it will be important to me to evaluate a wide range of economic and financial market indicators to complement the predictions yielded by model-based scenarios.
As I look ahead, if strong growth and robust employment gains were to continue into 2019 and be accompanied by a material rise in actual and expected inflation, that circumstance would indicate to me that additional policy normalization might well be required beyond what I currently expect.
By contrast, if strong growth and employment gains were to continue and be accompanied by stable inflation, inflation expectations, and expectations for Fed policy, that situation, to me, would argue against raising short-term interest rates by more than I currently expect.
In closing, with the economy operating as close as it has in a decade to the Federal Reserve's dual-mandate objectives of price stability and maximum employment, I believe monetary policy at this stage of the economic expansion should be aimed at sustaining growth and maximum employment at levels consistent with keeping inflation at or close to the 2 percent objective.
Even after our most recent policy decision to raise the range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point, monetary policy remains accommodative, and I believe some further gradual adjustment in the policy rate range will likely be appropriate.
That said, at this stage in the business cycle, I believe it will be especially important to monitor a wide range of data to continually assess and calibrate the level of the policy rate that is consistent with meeting our objectives on a sustained basis.
I am grateful to Antulio Bomfim of the Federal Reserve Board staff for his assistance in preparing this text.
The views expressed are my own and not necessarily those of other Federal Reserve Board members or Federal Open Market Committee participants.
Milton Friedman (1968), "The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review, vol.
Richard Clarida, Jordi Galí, and Mark Gertler (2000), "Monetary Policy Rules and Macroeconomic Stability: Evidence and Some Theory," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
147-80; Richard Clarida (2015), "The Fed Is Ready to Raise Rates: Will Past Be Prologue?" International Finance, vol.
331-87, https://www.nber.org/chapters/c11068.pdf; and Michael Woodford (2003), Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press).

Don’t Chase the Needles: An Optimistic Assessment of the Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy
At the Economic Club of New York Luncheon, New York, New York
Now almost exactly a year into my appointment as Vice Chairman for Supervision, I have, as might be expected, spoken publicly most often about banking and the financial system more generally.
However, supervision and regulation are not all that I do at the Federal Reserve, and I welcome this opportunity to speak to another part of my day job, as a member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).
Today I would like to offer my take on the economic outlook, which is optimistic, and explain how I view my optimism as consistent with the continued gradual pace of policy tightening that many Committee participants have projected.
In particular, I will explain how my views on potential growth help shape my outlook, both for the economy and for the appropriate path of monetary policy.
Relatedly, I will discuss the uncertainties that arise when a central element of the outlook--in this case, the potential capacity of the economy--is unknown and largely unobservable.
In previous remarks on the economic outlook, delivered at a National Association for Business Economics conference in February, I characterized the U.S.
economy as being in a "good spot" and asked if the economy had reached a positive turning point following an extended period of post-crisis slow growth.
While many other forecasters had to revise up their forecasts over the course of the year, my own outlook is basically unchanged, because the economy is evolving essentially as I expected at the outset of the year.
Gross domestic product increased a robust 3‑1/4 percent in the first half of the year, and indicators suggest continued strong growth through the summer.
Economic conditions are as close to meeting the Federal Reserve's dual mandate for monetary policy--maximum sustainable employment and price stability‑‑as they have been in a long time.
Inflation is in line with the Committee's 2 percent objective, and the unemployment rate is at nearly a 50-year low.
How long can this strong growth be sustained? The answer depends largely on what form growth takes.
Growth that is supported by increases in the productive capacity of the economy should be durable.
However, if growth primarily reflects strong demand that stretches production beyond its sustainable capacity, the economy will run into constraints that will result in slower growth, higher prices, or a potentially destabilizing buildup of financial imbalances.
That said, I see many reasons to be optimistic about the growth of the potential capacity of the economy over the next few years.
In part, my optimism is rooted in the view that many of the factors that have been weighing on potential growth since the financial crisis could be lifting.
Why am I optimistic about the economy's supply potential? The growth of potential can, at the most basic level, be broken down into two factors: the supply of labor and the productivity of that labor.
Productivity, in turn, is importantly affected by changes in the stock of capital--that is, machines and factories--as well as technological advances and improved production methods.
For some time, the contribution of the labor force to potential growth has been held down by the predictable drag of baby boomers moving into retirement.
However, the decline in labor force participation following the financial crisis exceeded even what might be expected given this long-standing downward trend-- in particular, as the participation of prime-age workers (those between the ages of 25 and 54) fell and teenagers exited the workforce in droves.
Thus, I think there is some potential for labor force participation to move up, perhaps as workers respond to the incentives of plentiful job opportunities and higher wages, thereby adding to the productive capacity of the economy and pushing back the constraints on growth.
For example, the two-decade-long trend increase in the population not in the labor force on account of disability peaked in 2014 and has started to move down quite rapidly--again, for reasons that defy easy explanation but may reflect the general improvement in labor market opportunities.3
Labor productivity has averaged an annual growth rate of only 3/4 percent since 2011, far below the 2-1/4 percent pace that prevailed in the two decades before the financial crisis.
The most recent data have been moving in the right direction, but only haltingly, with labor productivity increasing about 1-1/4 percent over the past year.
There are reasons that productivity growth could shake off some of its recent torpidity.
After picking up in 2017, business fixed investment climbed a robust 10 percent at an annual rate in the first half of this year, likely supported by lower corporate tax rates and other incentives in last year's tax bill.
Also, indicators for investment, including orders and shipments of nondefense capital goods, point toward continued strength, and survey evidence points to high business optimism and solid capital expenditure plans.
It might be that the productivity gains associated with these and other new technologies are embodied in new capital equipment and will only now start to become apparent as the investment drought of recent years comes to an end.
A tighter economy could also create incentives for firms to revamp their production methods to save on scarce labor resources.
Whether this performance is sustained will be importantly determined by whether growth is supported by increases in the economy's potential.
I am hopeful that potential growth, and particularly productivity, could accelerate from its relatively anemic pace of late, sustaining growth without overheating the economy.
The more the economy's potential growth increases, the more gradual we can be in our removal of monetary policy accommodation.
Thus, an assessment of the pace of potential growth will be an important input into what I view as the appropriate path of policy to achieve our objectives of maximum sustainable employment and price stability.
The tricky thing, as I pointed out earlier, is that potential output is unobserved and can only be inferred from the behavior of other measured economic indicators.
Traditionally, as taught in Econ 101, inflation provides a signal on whether the economy is operating above or below its potential level.
If inflation moves up in a sustained manner, not just because of temporary shocks, then the economy is likely operating above its productive capacity, as firms have the leeway to raise prices given the strength of demand.
Likewise, if inflation moves down persistently, then the economy is likely operating with some slack, as firms restrain prices to sell their products in the face of weak demand.
If inflation is the primary indicator of the economy's position relative to potential, how confident can we be in the quality of the signal? It has been noted--quite frequently, I might add--that the relationship between inflation and the tightness of the economy has gotten weaker, which is to say that inflation appears to be less affected by movements in economic slack or tightness, traditionally measured by the unemployment rate, than in the past.
As the role of slack in explaining inflation has diminished, inflation expectations have assumed greater importance.
However, it is reasonable to ask, if inflation is, in fact, now largely a reflection of inflation expectations, is inflation still a good indicator of the cyclical state of the economy? Or, more directly, can we count on inflation to warn us in time if the economy is overheating?
To be a little controversial, perhaps what we are witnessing with inflation is an application of what has been called Goodhart's law, named after Charles Goodhart, the distinguished scholar of central banking at the London School of Economics.4 The law can be summarized as the idea that if an indicator becomes a target of policy, that indicator loses its value as a gauge of the state of the economy.
Something along these lines could be happening to inflation, especially given the important role of expected inflation in the behavior of actual inflation.
Perhaps inflation is just sending a signal of people's trust in the Fed's ability to meet its inflation objective.
However, a problem does arise if the Fed remains reliant on inflation as our only gauge of the economy's position relative to its potential.
There are risks in pushing the economy into a place it does not want to go if we limit ourselves to navigating by what might be a faulty indicator.
Anchored inflation expectations might mask the inflation signal coming from an overheated economy for a period, but I have no doubt that prices would eventually move up in response to resource constraints.
The ultimate price, from the perspective of the dual mandate, would be an unanchoring of inflation expectations.
Of course, I view this more as a risk than my baseline expectation.
As I have said, I am optimistic about potential growth, and I expect that even relatively strong growth can be met without running into economic constraints.
There are other signs of potential besides inflation, including, but not limited to, direct measures of labor utilization or indications of shortages and bottlenecks in production.
How should these thoughts affect monetary policy? I began my remarks by noting that there may be reason to think that the productive capacity of our economy could be accelerating, which would allow a more gradual withdrawal of accommodation without overheating.
But I have noted as well that there may be reason to think that resource constraints could be more binding than current inflation measures would traditionally indicate, which would call for a more athletic response.
Moreover, there is today a higher degree of uncertainty about many of these factors--measures of labor slack, the relation between labor slack and inflation, the sensitivity of current inflation measures to actual resource constraints, and the future growth of productivity, to name a few--than there has been for many years.
In such an environment, some have argued that this greater uncertainty leaves policymakers without a clear guide and market participants without a firm anchor, meaning policy itself could drift--perhaps dangerously.
Instead, I think this situation reinforces and supports the importance of a clear, steady strategy and a gradual, predictable approach to the removal of accommodation as we continue to monitor the data.
The bar could wander from side to side for a while for any of a number of reasons--distance from the beacon, the angle you were approaching it from, interference from other instruments on the panel, sunspots, or rain--and because of this uncertainty, the first rule taught to us as young pilots was, "Don't chase the needles."
Precisely because of the uncertainty around the course inputs, the right strategy was to set a course based on your knowledge of the destination, winds, and performance of your plane; communicate that course clearly to air traffic control so everyone knew what you were doing; and then stick to that course steadily even as the course needle might waver from side to side across your instrument.
In a world where you had great confidence in the sensitivity of your instrument, such as in today's GPS-based avionics, you could respond immediately to moment-to-moment changes in your course readings, but in the world of radio beacons and sunspots, "chasing the needles" would at best lead to inefficient fishtailing across the sky, and at worst to a substantial deviation from your destination.
Today uncertainty around many of the macroeconomic inputs to monetary policy decisions argues for just the same approach to navigation.
Rather than meaning that policy will drift because of this uncertainty, it means that policymakers should chart a course that is stable, gradual, and predictable; communicate it clearly; and then follow that course through the temporarily shifting and sometimes conflicting signs from the economy unless some strong and steady signal requires a firm but moderate correction.
Given that the economy has performed fundamentally as I expected at the outset of this year, the right strategy is to maintain the gradual course that I have thought appropriate for some time now.
Put another way, while I think that there is enough reason to think that the productive capacity of our economy might be increasing so that we should not feel compelled to accelerate our pace, I also think there is enough doubt about current inflation as an infallibly reliable measure of current resource constraints that the continued gradual removal of accommodation is appropriate.
The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Economy," speech delivered at "Promoting Sustained Growth: Policy Tensions and Risks," 34th Annual NABE Economic Policy Conference, Washington, February 26.
See Ernie Tedeschi (2018), "Will Employment Keep Growing? Disabled Workers Offer a Clue," New York Times, March 15.

At the FinTech, Financial Inclusion -- and the Potential to Transform Financial Services Hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston and the Aspen Institute Financial Security Program, Boston, Massachusetts
Like many of you, I have long been interested in the potential for innovation to improve financial access for families and small businesses who are underserved.
In addition, technological infrastructure is developing, such as faster payment systems, along with the potential for more transparent and simpler product offerings enabled by richer data and lower-cost processing.
The World Bank's Global Findex Database starts with a seemingly reasonable proxy for financial inclusion: access to financial accounts.
Having access to basic transaction and savings accounts has been shown to be an important step to financial inclusion, particularly in developing countries.
For instance, a 2013 experiment provided savings accounts to a random sample of market vendors in Kenya, most of whom were women.
The vendors with accounts saved at a higher rate and invested 60 percent more in their businesses relative to those who did not have accounts.2 Similarly, women-headed households in Nepal ultimately spent more on nutritious foods and education when they received free savings accounts relative to those who did not.3
Here in the United States, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation's (FDIC's) most recent survey of unbanked and underbanked households found that 7 percent of U.S.
households in 2015 were "unbanked."5 The unbanked rate was nearly a percentage point lower than the prior survey in 2013 and is lower than in earlier years.
The World Bank noted, for instance, that about 1.1 billion unbanked people, about two-thirds of the unbanked population, has a mobile phone.6 Here in the United States, the Federal Reserve Board's 2015 Survey of Consumers' Use of Mobile Financial Services found that nearly 60 percent of the U.S.
The high transaction costs were reflected in interest rates many times greater than those available for established businesses in urban areas.
A recent analysis by staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta notes that automated fintech platforms have lower operating costs relative to storefront payday lenders.9 A recent study by staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York finds that fintech lenders process mortgages on average 20 percent faster than traditional lenders.
In particular, while access to accounts and to credit may be beneficial, they are by no means sufficient to ensure financial resilience on their own.
In some cases, customers that are provided financial accounts quickly return to the cash economy.
For example, in 2014, India launched an ambitious financial inclusion program with the goal of connecting every citizen to a basic bank account that facilitated the opening of 240 million accounts.
In 2010, fintech lenders made only 1 percent of personal loan originations in the United States.
By mid-2017, fintech lenders--often in conjunction with bank partners--were responsible for nearly a third of the personal loan market.12 It is not clear how much of this fintech lending is making a significant dent in financial inclusion, as opposed to serving prime and near-prime consumers in the United States.13 A 2017 study by TransUnion found that fintech lenders focused 59 percent of their originations in the near prime and prime risk tiers by the end of 2016--up marginally over the previous two years.14 Researchers at the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Chicago found that at least some fintech lenders were able to slot "some borrowers who would be classified as subprime by traditional criteria" into better loan grades.15 But the differences from existing channels may not be large: TransUnion found that around 10 percent of loans originated by fintech lenders were to subprime consumers, as compared to 14 percent for the overall market for personal loans.
Account access and credit may be helpful and possibly even necessary components of a solution.
In particular, it appears that many unbanked or underbanked people in the United States are intentionally choosing not to maintain a bank account, which may hold clues to what underserved families and small businesses actually need.
The data show that nearly half of the unbanked households actually had bank accounts in the past, based on a 2015 FDIC survey.16 A third of these previously banked households explained that they currently did not have bank accounts because of high or unpredictable fees, as did roughly a fifth of unbanked households that previously did not have accounts.
The single most cited reason for not having accounts was not having "enough money." More than 10 percent of the unbanked explained that they simply "don't trust banks." Those findings were echoed at an international level by the Findex database, where roughly a fifth of adults without a financial account cited a lack of trust in the financial system.17
To explore why consumers would choose to use alternative financial services over traditional bank accounts, Lisa Servon of the University of Pennsylvania worked for both a check-cashing firm and a payday lender.18 Servon observed that check-cashing firms used simple fee structures that were transparent and prominently displayed, similar to an overhead priced menu at a fast-food restaurant.
By the same token, it may not be clear exactly when the funds associated with a payment by check are likely to be deducted from the account.
That lack of predictability can be extremely important to a family that is living paycheck to paycheck.
Bouncing a rent check, phone payment, or utility payment can have a destabilizing impact on day-to-day life with further knock-on effects and costs.
When a check for a utility payment is rejected due to insufficient funds, for instance, the account holder may have to make time-consuming calls to get the lights turned back on, while also struggling to pay the associated overdraft fee.
Among bank customers who bounced checks, a relatively small minority bore the brunt of the fees: A quarter of accounts with overdrafts incurred in 2011 had more than 10 overdraft fees during that year.20
Nearly a third of households whose annual incomes were twice the supplemental poverty measure dipped below the poverty line for at least one month during the year.21 The Federal Reserve Board's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED) similarly finds that 10 percent of all adults self-reported that they struggled to pay their bills at least once in the past year due to volatile income.22 Jonathan Morduch and Rachel Schneider, the principal investigators of the Financial Diaries, argue that access to steady, predictable cash flows is an important source of financial inequality.23
Further complicating things, expense shocks rarely occur on their own, but instead can cascade into additional expenses and stress for families on the margins.
27 Nearly half of households studied by the Pew Charitable Trust had not recovered from financial shocks at least six months afterward.28 And the Federal Reserve SHED finds that 40 percent of adults report they would have difficulty covering an unexpected expense of $400.29
Access to credit can be an important part of weathering these shocks.
The Federal Reserve SHED finds that families with less access to credit are more likely to self-report financial hardship due to income volatility.31 But credit is only useful if consumers have the means to repay the debt in a timely manner and stabilize their financial lives.
The Federal Reserve System's 2017 Small Business Credit Survey finds that this is one of the most appealing features of online lenders for small business borrowers.32 With regard to consumers, a 2014 report by the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection found that 80 percent of payday loans are rolled over or followed by another loan within 14 days.33 The Bureau found that many loan sequences end quickly, but 15 percent of new loans are followed by others--and half of all loans were part of a sequence of at least 10 loans.
Financial health is more difficult to measure than bank accounts, and policymakers and researchers are learning how to better work with that complexity.
For instance, when the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection released the findings of its research on financial well-being, it included a 10-item Financial Well-Being Scale Questionnaire, a self-evaluation tool designed to help an individual think comprehensively about his or her financial life.34 The questionnaire asks consumers to rate statements such as "I can enjoy life because of the way I'm managing my money" and "I am securing my financial future."
Similarly, this April, the Center for Financial Services Innovation announced the launch of a new data set that uses subjective consumer responses to survey questions and pairs that information with actual data on their financial transactions.35 The regularly refreshed data is designed to give industry, researchers, and policymakers better insight into consumers' financial lives by providing more accurate metrics for assessing changes over time.
The new initiative, which they call "Financial Health Pulse," aims to bring the siloes of a consumer's financial life into one comprehensive picture, encompassing "income, spending, savings, debt, retirement, and credit scores."
Within the Federal Reserve System, we recognize that we have a role and, potentially, a responsibility to help create an infrastructure that facilitates safe, innovative, and ubiquitous faster payment services.
Earlier this month, we announced that we are seeking public comment on whether the Reserve Banks should take a more active role in modernizing our infrastructure to support interbank settlement of faster payments in real time.36
For households living paycheck to paycheck, the difference between waiting for a payment to clear and receiving a payment in real time is not merely an inconvenience; it could tip the balance toward overdraft fees, bounced checks, or collection fees.
In addition, many small businesses cite immediate access to working capital to finance inventories or pay employees as their number one constraint on growth.
If a small business could count on its customers' payments being immediately accessible in its bank account, it could reduce the need for short-term financing to cover the costs of ordering materials and goods well in advance.
Indeed, some "gig economy" employers have begun to offer "instant pay" options that allow contractors to cash out their earnings as frequently as five times a day.39 But when these options recently stopped working for about a week, news reports cited comments from drivers that were hindered in their ability to refuel, pay rent, or buy groceries because they were temporarily unable to access their pay as they earned it.40
Many of the recent mobile apps provided by bank and fintech providers, separately or in partnership, enable consumers to check balances, pay bills, and deposit checks around the clock and every day of the week via their phones.
Some banks have introduced innovative online-only accounts that are fee-free and require no minimum deposits, while offering phone-based deposits, account interfaces, and bill payment.41
Some banks offer no-fee, phone-based accounts that incorporate savings and budgeting tools that look and feel like nonbank fintech apps.
With other tools, using just their phone, a customer can set rules for their bank account, ranging from declining transactions that would overdraw the account, to automatically transferring funds from a related account, to opening an overdraft line of credit, or being charged a fixed-dollar overdraft fee, with a one-day grace period to avoid the fee.
New platforms like faster payment systems have the potential to combine with other technological improvements, like cheap access to cloud computing and an open-source approach to artificial intelligence, to create more full-stack approaches to financial inclusion.
A new generation of offerings experiments with using machine-learning tools and data aggregation to study consumers' expense and income flows in order to offer credit to consumers with little to no traditional credit histories.43 As mentioned earlier, other apps are using faster payments and cheap accounts to offer consumers tools to smooth volatility in their incomes.44 Still other products are using behavioral economics-based "nudges" to help consumers grow their savings.45
It is still very early, and many of these products have difficult issues to work through with respect to consumer data security and privacy, which may have important implications for pricing of services.
In the colonias area on the Texas-Mexico border, I met with families that are unbanked, students that could not complete their homework, and businesses that could not serve customers outside their local area because they lacked the internet connectivity that many of us take for granted.47 The Federal Reserve, and other federal banking agencies, view access to technology as increasingly essential to households and small businesses in underserved low- and moderate-income communities.
That is why we have clarified that efforts to provide communications infrastructure, such as broadband internet service, may be viewed favorably under the Community Reinvestment Act or CRA.48
Financial literacy and consumer protections are critically important regardless of whether financial services are delivered through traditional means or smartphone apps.
I am grateful to Kelvin Chen of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Pascaline Dupas and Jonathan Robinson, "Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Development: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya (PDF)," American Economic Journal: Applied Economics (2013): 163–192, cited in World Bank Group, The Global Findex Database 2017 (2017).
World Bank Group, The Global Findex Database 2017, (2017): xi.
The Findex Database is widely considered the authoritative database for measuring progress and need for financial inclusion from an international perspective.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, 2015 FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households (PDF) (October 20, 2016).
Federal Reserve Board, Consumers and Mobile Financial Services, 12, see table 4.
See, e.g., Brainard, "Senegal Community and Enterprise Development Project" in C.
Wall, "Fintech and Financial Inclusion," Notes from the Vault (Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, August 2017) (quoting J.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta compared the high operating costs of storefront payday lenders with the automation of the Chinese fintech Alibaba's savings tools.
Andreas Fuster, Matthew Plosser, Philipp Schnabl, and James Vickery, "The Role of Technology in Mortgage Lending," Working Paper 24500 (Federal Reserve Bank of New York, April 2018).
See, e.g., Press Release, TransUnion, FinTechs Taking Larger Share of Personal Loan Market While Increasing Portfolio Risk-Return Performance (Nov.
Wirth, "Fact or Fiction," https://www.transunion.com/blog/fact-or-fiction-are-fintechs-different-than-other-lenders and TransUnion, "FinTechs Taking Larger Share of Personal Loan Market While Increasing Portfolio Risk-Return Performance," press release, November 2, 2017, https://newsroom.transunion.com/fintechs-taking-larger-share-of-personal-loan-market-while-increasing-portfolio-risk-return-performance/.
Julapa Jagtiani and Catharine Lemieux, "Do Fintech Lenders Penetrate Areas That Are Underserved by Traditional Banks? (PDF)" Working Paper 18-13, (Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, March 2018).
See, e.g., "What Is Driving the 'Unbanking of America'?" National Public Radio, Fresh Air, January 10, 2017, https://www.npr.org/2017/01/10/509126878/what-is-driving-the-unbanking-of-america, cited in Wall, "Fintech and Financial Inclusion." Return to text
The findings here refer to banks in the study "that tracked all incidences for all accounts opened at any time during 2011." Return to text
The findings here refer to banks in the study "that tracked all incidences for all accounts opened at any time during 2011." Return to text
Marra, "The Financial Diaries Authors Discuss Income Volatility," Bridges, (Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S.
Jonathan Morduch and Rachel Schneider, "Mismatch: How Income and Expense Volatility Are Undermining Households," Stanford Social Innovation Review, January 12, 2016, https://ssir.org/articles/entry/mismatch_how_income_and_expense_volatility_are_undermining_households Return to text
The Pew Charitable Trusts, The Role of Emergency Savings in Family Financial Security: How Do Families Cope With Financial Shocks? (PDF) (October 2015).
The Pew Charitable Trusts, The Role of Emergency Savings (PDF).
Morduch and Schneider, "Mismatch: How Income and Expense Volatility Are Undermining Households," https://ssir.org/articles/entry/mismatch_how_income_and_expense_volatility_are_undermining_households Return to text
Morduch and Schneider, "Mismatch: How Income and Expense Volatility Are Undermining Households," https://ssir.org/articles/entry/mismatch_how_income_and_expense_volatility_are_undermining_households Return to text
The Pew Charitable Trusts, The Role of Emergency Savings (PDF).
Federal Reserve Board, Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S.
Households (PDF), 21, ("Over the past five years, as the economy has recovered, the fraction of families able to easily cover this emergency expense has increased by about 9 percentage points.").
See Marra, "The Financial Diaries Authors Discuss Income Volatility." Return to text
Federal Reserve Board, Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S.
For example, one-fourth of adults who are not confident in their ability to be approved for a credit card self-reported that they had experienced hardship from income volatility over the past year, as compared to only 6 percent of those who were confident in their credit availability.
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, Dallas, Kansas City, Minneapolis, New York, Philadelphia, Richmond, St.
Louis, and San Francisco, 2017 Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms (PDF).
Lael Brainard, "Supporting Fast Payments for All," (speech at the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Chicago, IL, October 3, 2018).
See, e.g., "What's a 360 Checking account?" Capital One, https://www.capitalone.com/bank/checking-accounts/online-checking-account/.
See, e.g., Simple, https://www.simple.com/; Frank Chaparro, "JPMorgan Chase launched an online bank for millennials called Finn, and I prefer it to the real thing," Business Insider, July 8, 2018, https://www.businessinsider.com/jpmorgan-chase-online-bank-finn-for-millennials-2018-7.
See Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Closing the Digital Divide: A Framework for Meeting CRA Obligations, (revised December 2016).
On July 15, 2016, the federal bank regulatory agencies issued new CRA guidance that includes references to broadband access, (https://www.ffiec.gov/cra/pdf/2016_QA_Federal_Register_Notice.pdf).
Lael Brainard, "The Opportunities and Challenges of Fintech," (speech at the Conference on Financial Innovation, Washington, DC, December 2, 2016) Return to text

At "Community Banking in the 21st Century" Sixth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve System, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, St.
I want to thank the conference organizers for inviting me to speak to you today.1 It is an honor and a pleasure to be part of this unique annual event that brings together bankers, bank supervisors, and researchers to discuss the latest community banking research, recent trends in community banking practices, and policy issues that are on the minds of conference attendees.
I want to start, first, by conveying my own perspective on the importance of community banks.
Community banks have a long history of providing essential financial services to households, small businesses, and small farms in communities across the United States.
Their ability to effectively provide these services speaks to the strength of the community banking business model--that is, establishing and maintaining local relationships, and offering customers a face-to-face interaction with a local banker.
And it is something I have observed firsthand, especially for community banks in rural communities.
Growing up in rural Colorado and Utah, I saw the importance of community bankers having local knowledge and being personally invested in the same communities that they serve.
That local knowledge, and the relationship-based lending that is the hallmark of community banking, can stem losses during downturns, as community banks may be able to work with borrowers to avoid losses.
Indeed, research has shown that small business lending at small banks declined less severely than at large banks during the last recession.2 At the same time, I have seen the challenges that many community banks face.
I want to be careful not to overstate those challenges--to paraphrase Mark Twain, the reports of your demise are greatly exaggerated--and I believe that the community bank model has many advantages and will continue to play an integral role in our financial system.
These sorts of dynamics are one reason that community banks are an important topic for research.
As you probably know, this is the sixth annual community banking conference cosponsored by the Federal Reserve and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS), and it is the first conference for which the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation is joining as a cosponsor.
The organizers of the inaugural conference decided that, rather than holding a traditional academic-style conference, they would invite bankers and bank supervisors to hear what the researchers had to say and to share their real-world experience with the researchers.
The Case Study Competition, which is sponsored by the CSBS, introduces undergraduates to community banking and some of the challenges that community bankers face.
students who are considering or working on a dissertation on a banking-related topic and encourage them to develop a research agenda that focuses on community banking issues.
Turning to the topic of today's speech, it occurs to me that we often speak of community banks as though they are all pretty much the same.
But, in reality, there is considerable heterogeneity within the group of firms that are commonly considered to be community banks.3 One important dimension of diversity is size, which can range anywhere from less than $100 million in assets to around $10 billion in assets.
As noted by Chairman Powell when he spoke at this conference two years ago, looking at community banks as a monolithic group masks some important differences between the smallest and largest community banking organizations.4 For example, essentially all of the decline in the number of community banking organizations over the past two decades has taken place among those with assets less than $100 million.
And these smallest banking organizations have consistently had a lower average rate of return on assets than their larger peers.
Another significant aspect of diversity among community banks is the type of market served--urban versus rural.
These two types of areas differ in many respects, including the age distribution of the population, the share of the population with a college degree, homeownership rates, poverty rates, and the share of the population with internet access.5 And while the national population has been growing over the past 20 to 30 years, many rural areas have experienced population declines, and the share of the population living in rural areas has been falling.6 Furthermore, since 2008, most job growth in the United States has occurred in urban areas.7
Given these differing circumstances, it is not surprising that community banks operating in rural and urban areas tend to face different challenges.
And some observers have expressed concern about the implications of bank consolidation over the past two or three decades for access to banking services in rural areas while also wondering about the future viability of rural community banks.
The number of community banks has been declining over the last 20 years, but community banks still account for more than 95 percent of banks operating in the United States.
The decline has been roughly similar for urban and rural community banks, leaving the share of community banks that operate primarily in rural markets quite stable at just over 50 percent.
While urban community banks are quite a bit larger than rural community banks on average, over the last 20 years, rural community banks have consistently earned higher rates of return on assets and rates of return on equity than their urban peers despite a more challenging economic environment.
In addition, much of the data that I am presenting today is aggregated to the county level, which obscures community-level dynamics: Some communities within a county may have lost banks or bank branches, while others may have gained.
Federal Reserve staff are engaged in efforts to further our understanding of the effects of losses of banks or bank branches on the people who live and work in the affected communities.
National Trends in Urban versus Rural Community Banks over the Past 20 Years
The number of banks in the United States fell by almost half over the past 20 years--from about 10,700 in 1997 to about 5,600 in 2017.
About 97 percent of the decrease was accounted for by community banks.
Looking at the trend in the number of urban and rural community banks (figure 1), we see that the number of banks in both of these categories has been falling over time.
The rate of decline was steeper for rural banks than for urban banks before the financial crisis but has reversed in the post-crisis period.
This reversal may be due to the fact that, as we will see momentarily, urban community banks suffered more severe losses in the immediate post-crisis period than did rural community banks.
And the share of community banks that operate primarily in rural markets has increased slightly, from 53 percent to 54 percent.
While there are more rural community banks than urban community banks, the latter consistently account for a larger volume of deposits, loans, and offices than the former.
This difference is due, in part, to the average size of an urban community bank, in terms of total assets, being about two and a half to three and a half times that of the average rural community bank (figure 2).
As community banks have increased in asset size, they have also grown their branch networks.
The average number of branches for an urban bank is about 1.7 to 2 times that of a rural bank (figure 3).
Looking next at the total amount of deposits held by all urban community banks and all rural community banks, we can see that both have been trending upward over time (figure 4).
Growth in total loans outstanding was strong for both urban and rural community banks between 1997 and 2008 (figure 5).
Declines in lending between 2008 and 2011 were more severe for urban community banks than rural ones.
Coming out of the recent recessions, rural community banks have seen quite modest loan growth since 2011, while the pace of growth in urban community bank lending has been strong since 2013.
This divergence in recent growth rates may be due to the fact that the recovery from the recent recession has been much more robust in urban areas than in rural areas of the country.
When it comes to performance measures, rural community banks consistently outperform urban community banks with regard to return on assets (figure 6) and return on equity (figure 7).
This difference was particularly pronounced during the financial crisis, when profitability fell much more sharply at urban community banks than at rural community banks.
Looking at charge‑off rates (figure 8), we see that they have been quite similar for the two types of community banks over most of the past 20 years, except for the period from 2008 to 2013, when rural community banks had lower charge-off rates than urban community banks.
This data suggest that, despite facing a more challenging economic environment, rural community banks appear to be holding their own relative to urban community banks.
Now I would like to shift my focus from the banks themselves to the communities they serve by exploring whether access to banking services--provided by community or larger banks--has been declining in urban or rural areas of the country.
As of 2017, the average urban market was home to 18 community banks and just over 8 large banks, which represents a change from 21 community banks and 6 large banks in 1997 (figure 9).
The average number of community banks per rural market has been remarkably stable over the past 20 years at right around 4, while the average number of large banks per rural market has increased from just under 1 to 1.4 (figure 10).
These statistics indicate that, perhaps surprisingly, the average number of banks in rural markets has actually increased in the past 20 years.
If we look at the number of bank branches rather than the number of competitors, we see a significant increase in the number of branches in the average urban market, with the entire increase coming from branches of large banks (figure 11).
Over the same period, there was essentially no change in the number of branches in rural markets, with a slight shift upward in the share of branches accounted for by large banks (figure 12).
Of course, there is substantial variation in the experiences of individual markets, as some local rural and urban markets gained and others lost bank branches.
As the share of branches in the average banking market operated by community banks has declined, so, too, has the share of deposits held at community banks.
This shift in deposit shares away from community banks, similar to the shift in branch shares, has been substantial in urban markets but only marginal in rural markets (figure 13).
Community banks held almost half of all deposits at urban bank branches in 1997, but just over one-third in 2017.
In rural markets, community banks collectively had a deposit market share of 80 percent in 1997, declining moderately to 77 percent in 2017.
Despite the decline in the overall share of deposits held by community banks in urban and rural markets over the past 20 years, the average individual community bank operating in each type of market has seen almost no change in its deposit market share (figure 14).
In other words, the decline in the share of market deposits held in aggregate by community banks is due to fewer community banks.
The fact that the average individual community bank has maintained or increased its deposit market share since 2008 suggests that community banks have been able to compete quite successfully with larger banks in both urban and rural markets during and since the recent recession.
As I have mentioned, the average numbers of banks and bank branches have increased or remained constant in rural markets in recent years despite a wave of mergers that has greatly reduced the number of U.S.
Industry consolidation has led to fewer banks but maintained most of the branches of the acquired banks.
In addition, most mergers and acquisitions have involved expansion into new markets by the acquiring bank rather than acquisitions of local competitors, which has allowed local communities to continue to enjoy a variety of potential providers of banking services despite the industry consolidation.8
One unavoidable aspect of consolidation is a loss in the number of bank headquarters offices.
The number of bank headquarters located in urban markets has fallen by half over the past 20 years, while the number in rural markets has fallen by 45 percent.9 Consolidation has led to a doubling in the number of banking markets--almost all of which are rural--in which no banks are headquartered (figure 16).
We hear anecdotally that banks are more attuned to the needs of the communities in which they are headquartered, so the significance of this loss could have an effect on the local markets.
At the end of the day, we care about bank branch locations because we care about the people and communities that they are serving or, in some cases, not serving adequately.
That is why the Federal Reserve System's Community Development function has undertaken a national series of listening sessions to assess the real effects of bank closures on rural communities.
Reserve Bank staff members are conducting the sessions around the country to gather information from consumers and small business owners in rural communities that have been directly affected by bank closures.
To identify where to conduct these sessions, we used data to identify rural towns that have experienced bank branch closures; in some cases, these towns lost the only bank in town and now have no remaining banks.
Then we convened local residents and small business owners to ask them about what the loss of a bank meant to them and their community.
Nonetheless, residents of Clark spoke positively about the importance of the personal touch a local bank can provide.
Residents liked familiar faces at the teller window and loan officers who understand the local economy when making small business loan decisions.
Indeed, even for community banks themselves, technology may be perceived as a threat or an opportunity, depending for example on whether the necessary infrastructure is available.
The loss of a bank branch also has a ripple effect on a community as a whole.
In the village of Brushton, New York, which lost its only bank branch in 2014, small business owners commented that when residents must leave the village to access banking services, they are more likely to shop, eat, and pay for services in other towns, which creates additional hardship for the small businesses of Brushton.
Additionally, as the ability of community members to access cash has decreased, credit card use has increased.
Small business owners in Brushton say that this growth in credit card usage has significantly increased the cost of doing business.
Lastly, one theme that we heard loud and clear across the country was that the loss of a local bank meant the loss of an important civic institution.
Banks do not just cash checks and make loans--they also place ads in small town newspapers, donate to local nonprofits, and sponsor local Little League teams.
As towns lose banks and bankers, they also lose important local leaders.
We will continue to conduct these listening sessions across the country throughout the fall.
To sum up, the numbers of urban and rural community banks have been declining over the past 20 years, but community banks continue to play an important role in both types of markets.
Urban and rural community banks face different challenges, but, on average, both seem to be faring well in the post-crisis period.
And the average rural banking market has not seen any decline in the number of banks or bank branches over recent years.
The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
While small banks reduced small business lending by roughly 13 percent between 2009 and 2011, large banks reduced lending by nearly 30 percent.
Cole (2012), How Did the Financial Crisis Affect Small Business Lending in the United States? report developed under contract with the U.S.
For the purpose of my remarks today, "community bank" means a bank or thrift with less than $10 billion in assets (in constant 2005 dollars).
I exclude from this definition any bank or thrift that has less than $10 billion in assets but is part of a larger organization with more than $10 billion in total banking assets.
"Urban community bank" is one that derives more than half of its deposits from offices located in one or more metropolitan statistical areas, and "rural community bank" derives at least half of its deposits from nonmetro areas.
Using the more nuanced Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) definition of a community bank, which takes into account both size and activities, would have very little effect on the trends that I will be discussing.
The FDIC definition can be found in Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (2012), "Defining the Community Bank (PDF)," in FDIC Community Banking Study (Washington: FDIC, December).
Powell (2016), "Trends in Community Bank Performance over the Past 20 Years," speech delivered at "Community Banking in the 21st Century," Fourth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, St.
See Kim Parker, Juliana Menasce Horowitz, Anna Brown, Richard Fry, D'Vera Cohn, and Ruth Igielnik (2018), "Demographic and Economic Trends in Urban, Suburban and Rural Communities," in What Unites and Divides Urban, Suburban and Rural Communities (Washington: Pew Research Center, May); or John M.
(2014), "Long-Term Trends in Rural Depopulation and Their Implications for Community Banks (PDF)," FDIC Quarterly, vol.
See Mark Muro and Jacob Whiton (2018), "Geographic Gaps Are Widening While U.S.
Economic Growth Increases," Brookings Institution, The Avenue (blog), January 23; and Brian Thiede, Lillie Greiman, Stephan Weiler, Steven C.
Beda, and Tessa Conroy (2017), "The Divide between Rural and Urban America, in 6 Charts," U.S.
One way that economists measure the structure of a market is by measures of market concentration.
The average urban market has more headquarters offices than the average rural market (figure 15).
There are just over 8 banks headquartered in the average urban market (down from just over 14 in 1997), compared with an average of 1.3 banks headquartered in the average rural market (down from 2.4 in 1997).


At the Fed Payments Improvement Community Forum, Sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois
The Role of the Federal Reserve in Ensuring Safe and Reliable Payments
The nation's first 150 years were frequently disrupted by panics in the financial system that extended into the payment system, which was highly fragmented and inefficient.
Before the Federal Reserve took on a role in the payment system, a check recipient could not count on receiving the full value written on the check and faced long and unpredictable delays in getting access to the funds.
Harding, described the circuitous, opaque, and costly route one payment made: "…a bank in Rochester, N.Y., sent a check drawn on a Birmingham, Ala., account to a correspondent bank in New York, which sent it along to a bank in Jacksonville, Fla.
From there, it traveled to Philadelphia, Baltimore and Cincinnati before it finally reached the originating bank in Birmingham."2 The fragmentation of the payment system imposed costs on American merchants, households, community banks, and, ultimately, on the overall U.S.
Ensuring a reliable nationwide payment infrastructure was one of the motivations that led the Congress to create the Federal Reserve after the severe financial panic of 1907.
Fostering a safe, efficient, and widely accessible payment infrastructure has been a crucial aspect of the Fed's mission from its founding in 1913.
By creating a new core infrastructure for clearing and settling checks, the Fed was able to boost confidence in banks and America's payment system, ensure Americans received the full value of their checks, and speed up payments.
That was the first, but not the last, time that the Fed played a central role in transforming America's retail payment system.
By the 1970s, the payment system was staggering under the weight of paper checks.
In 1973, Governor Jeffrey Bucher of the Federal Reserve Board described the exponential growth in check volume and the time-consuming and expensive process to clear paper checks as a "time bomb."3 The Federal Reserve and payment system stakeholders faced a choice: continue making incremental changes to manage the growing avalanche of checks, or look to technology to facilitate transformational change.
Working with the private sector, the Federal Reserve chose transformation, and the effect was dramatic.
In partnership with the private sector, the Federal Reserve supported the implementation of the automated clearinghouse, or ACH system, to process payroll payments for individuals, bill payments for households, and vendor payments for businesses.
It would require first a trip to the bank during business hours to deposit the paycheck and then several business days for that bank to complete the time-consuming process of collecting the funds from the employer's bank.4 With the advent of ACH, an employee could expect to access their pay from their bank on the same day it was deposited electronically by their employer.
Today, the ACH operates with important roles for the private sector and the Fed, is available nationwide, and constitutes a vital piece of infrastructure supporting earlier access to funds and reliable settlement of payments.5
But my friends have to be signed up for the same app to receive the payment, and they may have to wait for confirmation that the funds have moved from the app into their bank accounts before they can use the funds outside the app.
Similarly, if I want to make a purchase from a vendor online, all I have to do is upload my payment information and touch a screen to complete the purchase immediately.
But that payment in turn may not be immediately available to the seller.
Nascent faster payment services are emerging to address this demand from individuals and businesses for the capability to manage their finances more efficiently in real time.
These faster payment innovations are striving to keep up with this demand, but gaps in the underlying infrastructure pose challenges associated with safety, efficiency, and accessibility.
In many circumstances, the underlying infrastructure in place today cannot ensure that a fast payment is fully complete before the recipient seeks to use the funds.
To complete a payment, the banks behind the transaction need to transfer funds between each other.
Until this happens, the payment between them is like an "IOU."
Today's systems that transfer funds between banks are not set up to work in a 24/7, real-time world.
Instead, most faster payments settle funds between banks on a deferred basis.
Deferred settlement entails a buildup of obligations--like IOUs between banks--that could present real risks to the financial system in times of stress.
Although faster payment systems that rely on deferred settlements can incorporate certain measures to mitigate these risks, these measures may be appropriate for a nascent faster payment market only for a limited time.
As we saw with the avalanche of paper checks prior to ACH, as the volume and value of faster payments grow over time, the potential risks of deferred settlement to the financial system are also likely to grow.
To fully deliver on the promise of faster payments into the future, we need an infrastructure that can support continued growth and innovation, with a goal of settlement on a 24/7 basis in real time.
To ensure the robustness of the payment system into the future, banks and other providers acting as their agents should have access to a settlement system that operates 24/7 and settles each payment as soon as an individual sends it.
While everyone stands to benefit from faster payments, the benefits could be especially important for households and small business owners who face cash flow constraints.
A forthcoming Fed research note estimates that a quarter of households have less than $400 combined in their bank accounts.7 For these households, the difference between waiting for a payment to clear and receiving a payment in real time is not merely an inconvenience; it could tip the balance toward overdraft fees, bounced checks, or collections fees.
Similarly, many small businesses cite immediate access to working capital to finance inventories or pay employees as their number one constraint on growth.8 Smaller businesses and merchants would benefit from faster payments because of their need to tightly manage how much of their capital is tied up in unused material or inventory.
If a small business could count on its customers' payments being immediately accessible in its bank account, it could reduce its need for short-term financing to cover the costs of ordering materials and goods well in advance.
So what is our role at this moment of opportunity for the payment system? In keeping with the Fed's historical role in payments, five years ago we launched a collaborative effort with a broad array of stakeholders to catalyze a safe, efficient, and accessible faster payment system for the United States.
As part of that effort, 300 organizations representing consumers, businesses, banks, card companies, and technology providers, including many represented here today, came together to define expectations for the future of the retail payment system and to make recommendations on how to implement those expectations.
The members of the task force told us that the Federal Reserve needed to develop a 24/7 settlement system.9 The U.S.
Over the past year, we have undertaken an assessment of what the Federal Reserve could do to modernize its infrastructure to support interbank settlement of faster payments.
That assessment found that 24/7 payment-by-payment interbank settlement in real-time--what we refer to as real-time gross settlement (RTGS)--offers clear benefits in minimizing risk and maximizing efficiency.
A 24/7 economy with 24/7 real-time payments needs 24/7 real-time settlement, and RTGS is the way to achieve this.
That is where we believe that the Federal Reserve and the private sector together need to make investments for the future.
retail payment system lags behind some other countries: the Reserve Bank of Australia and the European Central Bank have already implemented or are on the cusp of implementing RTGS systems to support private-sector faster payment services.
The Federal Reserve and payment system stakeholders have an opportunity to upgrade America's payment system to meet the needs of households, businesses, and banks in the app economy.
Today, we are publishing a Federal Register notice that seeks public comment on potential steps the Federal Reserve could take to support the vision of RTGS of faster payments.
The Reserve Banks could develop a service for RTGS that is available on a 24/7 basis to provide payment-by-payment interbank settlement in real time and at any time, on any day, including weekends and holidays.
The Reserve Banks currently provide payment services to more than 11,000 banks across the country.
A 24/7 RTGS service provided by the Reserve Banks could significantly improve the prospect that banks of all sizes will have equitable access to a real-time interbank settlement infrastructure for faster payments in the long term.
This common infrastructure would support connections across banks, and faster payment service providers acting as their agents, with the potential to weave together the current patchwork of systems.
The capability to finalize interbank settlement before funds are made available to the recipient would avoid an undesirable buildup of risk in the system.
The more banks that have access to real-time as opposed to deferred settlement mechanisms, the lower the risk would be from deferring settlement to the payment system as a whole.
Although RTGS may be operationally demanding, it offers clear benefits from a risk and efficiency perspective over the long term.
The development of a nationwide real-time interbank settlement infrastructure could also support the development of private-sector faster payment services, thereby increasing innovation and choice in the market.
Banks and technology providers of all sizes may be able to develop new services or enhance existing services by capitalizing on the underlying interbank settlement infrastructure.
In that regard, we are also seeking comment on whether the Reserve Banks should consider developing a liquidity management tool that would operate 24/7 in support of services for real-time interbank settlement of faster payments.
The tool could support settlement services provided by the private sector or the Reserve Banks.
The Federal Reserve has a responsibility to promote a payment system that serves the evolving needs of the public.
To that end, the Federal Register notice poses a series of questions related to whether an RTGS is the appropriate strategic foundation for interbank settlement of faster payments.
We also solicit views on the appropriate role for the Federal Reserve in such a system.
We look forward to hearing from, and learning from, a broad array of stakeholders, including those who are actively involved in the provision of payment and banking services, as well as representatives of the consumers, households, and businesses who rely on the ability to make and receive payments every day.
As technological change continues to drive payments innovation, we continue to focus on the same basic objective that motivated our initial engagement in the payment system a century ago: promoting a safe, efficient, and accessible payment system that serves the interests of all Americans.
The Fed has the unique ability to provide the infrastructure to reliably settle obligations between banks using balances at the central bank.
As such, we have a responsibility to serve the broad public interest by providing a flexible and robust payment infrastructure on which the private sector can innovate.
We look forward to hearing from you on the important choices before us as we work to safeguard the integrity and efficiency of our payment system.
I am grateful to Susan Foley, John Maggs, Mark Manuszak, and Anjana Ravi of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
143; Bill Medley, Highways of Commerce: Central Banking and the U.S.
Payments System (PDF) (Kansas City: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 2017), p.
Jeffrey Bucher, "The Check," (remarks at the Annual Meeting, Bank Stationers Association, Colorado Springs, CO, June 4, 1973).
According to the Federal Reserve Payments Study 2016 (PDF), in 2015, the ACH system was used for 23.5 billion payments, totaling $145.3 trillion in value.
The Faster Payments Task Force viewed 24x7x365 service availability and final funds provided to the recipient within one minute as characteristics of a "very effective" faster payment service.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S.
Households in 2017 (Washington: Board of Governors, May 2018); Neil Bhutta and Lisa Dettling, "Money in the Bank? Assessing Families' Liquid Savings Using the Survey of Consumer Finances," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, forthcoming).
See 2015 Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms (PDF), March 2016.
Department of the Treasury, A Financial System That Creates Economic Opportunities: Nonbank Financials, Fintech, and Innovation (PDF) (Washington: Department of the Treasury, July 2018).

Monetary Policy and Risk Management at a Time of Low Inflation and Low Unemployment
At the "Revolution or Evolution? Reexamining Economic Paradigms" 60th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Boston, Massachusetts
Today I will focus on the Federal Reserve's ongoing efforts to promote maximum employment and stable prices.
I am pleased to say that, by these measures, the economy looks very good.
The unemployment rate stands at 3.9 percent, near a 20-year low.
Inflation is currently running near the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) objective of 2 percent.
While these two top-line statistics do not always present an accurate picture of overall economic conditions, a wide range of data on jobs and prices supports a positive view.
For example, the medians of the most recent projections from FOMC participants and the Survey of Professional Forecasters, as well as the most recent Congressional Budget Office (CBO) forecast, all have the unemployment rate remaining below 4 percent through the end of 2020, with inflation staying very near 2 percent over the same period.1
Indeed, I was asked at last week's press conference whether these forecasts are too good to be true--a reasonable question! Since 1950, the U.S.
economy has experienced periods of low, stable inflation and periods of very low unemployment, but never both for such an extended time as is seen in these forecasts.2 Standard economic thinking has long offered an explanation for this: If unemployment were to remain this low for this long, employers would be pushing up wages as they compete for scarce workers, and rising labor costs would feed into more‑rapid price inflation faced by consumers.
This dynamic between unemployment and inflation is known as a Phillips curve relationship, and at times it can pose a fundamental tension between the two sides of the Fed's mandate to promote maximum employment and price stability.
Recent low inflation and unemployment have some analysts asking, "Is the Phillips curve dead?"3 Others argue that the Phillips curve still lurks in the background and could reemerge at any time to exact revenge for low unemployment in the form of high inflation.
The first is to explain how changes in the Phillips curve help account for the somewhat surprising but broadly shared current forecasts of continued very low unemployment with inflation near 2 percent.
At the risk of spoiling the surprise, I do not see it as likely that the Phillips curve is dead, or that it will soon exact revenge.
What is more likely, in my view, is that many factors, including better conduct of monetary policy over the past few decades, have greatly reduced, but not eliminated, the effects that tight labor markets have on inflation.
However, no one fully understands the nature of these changes or the role they play in the current context.
Thus, my second objective today is to explain, given this uncertainty about the unemployment-inflation relationship, the important role that risk management plays in setting monetary policy.
I will explore the FOMC's monitoring and balancing of risks as well as our contingency planning for cases when risk becomes reality.
Let us start with a look at the modern history of jobs and inflation in the United States.
Figure 1 shows headline inflation and unemployment from 1960 to today and extended through 2020 using the average of median projections from both FOMC participants and the Survey of Professional Forecasters, and the CBO projections.
As the figure makes clear, a multiyear period with unemployment below 4 percent and stable inflation would, if realized, be unique in modern U.S.
The first period includes the Great Inflation, and the latter includes both the Great Moderation and the distinctly immoderate period of the Global Financial Crisis and its aftermath.
Figure 2 shows unemployment and core, rather than headline, inflation in these two periods.
While our inflation objective concerns headline inflation, switching to core inflation makes some relationships clearer by removing a good deal of variability due to food and energy prices, variability that is not primarily driven by labor market conditions or monetary policy.
During the Great Inflation, unemployment fluctuated between roughly 4 percent and 10 percent, and inflation moved over a similar range.
In the recent period, the unemployment rate also fluctuated between roughly 4 percent and 10 percent, but inflation has been relatively tame, averaging 1.7 percent and never declining below 1 percent or rising to 2.5 percent.
Nothing in the red line hints at a major economic event, let alone the immense upheaval around the time of the global financial crisis.
Notice that, in each period, there is only one episode in which unemployment drops below 4 percent.
In the late 1960s, unemployment remained at or below 4 percent for four years, and during that time inflation rose steadily from under 2 percent to almost 5 percent.
By contrast, the late 1990s episode of below-4-percent unemployment was quite brief, and during the episode and surrounding quarters inflation was reasonably stable and remained below 2 percent.
To explore the Phillips curve relationship in these two periods more closely, we need to bring in the concept of the natural rate of unemployment.
In standard economic thinking, an unemployment rate above the natural rate indicates slack in the labor market and tends to be associated with downward pressure on inflation; unemployment below the natural rate represents a tight labor market and is associated with upward inflation pressure.
Figure 3 repeats figure 2 but replaces unemployment with labor market slack as measured by unemployment minus the CBO's current estimate of the natural rate of unemployment at each point in time.6 Periods of tight labor markets are shaded.
During the Great Inflation, inflation generally rose in the tight, shaded periods and fell in the unshaded ones, just as conventional Phillips curve reasoning predicts.
From 1995 to today, the large and persistent swings in the gap between unemployment and the natural rate were associated with, at most, a move of a few tenths in the inflation rate.
A Simple Framework for Understanding Changes in the Jobs-Inflation Relationship
A natural starting point is the simplest form of a Phillips curve equation, which posits that inflation this year is determined by some combination of current labor market slack, inflation last year, and some other factors that I will leave aside for this discussion (figure 4):7
With a larger value of B, any change in labor market slack translates into a bigger change in inflation.
The value of C determines inflation's persistence--that is, how long any given change in inflation tends to linger.
As the value of C increases, higher inflation this year translates more into higher inflation next year.
One implication of a large C is that, if a boom drives inflation up, it will tend to stay up unless offset by a subsequent bust.8
During the Great Inflation samples, the value of C is near 1, meaning that higher inflation one year tended to translate almost one-for-one into higher inflation the next.
The Phillips curve is also relatively steep in the Great Inflation samples, with 1 extra percentage point of lower unemployment converting into roughly 1/2 percentage point of higher inflation.
Thus, the Great Inflation presented that nasty case just described.
In the most recent samples, the Phillips curve is nearly flat, with B very near zero, and C is about 0.25, meaning that roughly one fourth of any rise or fall in inflation carries forward.
These results give numerical form to what we see in the right-hand panel of figure 3, covering the recent period: Large and persistent moves in the unemployment gap were associated with, at most, modest transitory moves in inflation.
To provide a sound basis for monetary policy, it is important to understand what happened and why, so we can avoid a return to the bad old days of the 1970s.
Like many, I believe better monetary policy has played a central role.9
To understand the mechanism, let us ask how central banks could, presumably inadvertently, amplify and extend the duration of inflation's response to labor market tightness.
To do so, the central bank could persistently ease the stance of monetary policy in response to an uptick in inflation.
No responsible central banker today would intentionally do this, but much research suggests that during the Great Inflation, misunderstandings about how the economy worked led the Fed effectively to behave in this manner.10 Some policymakers may have believed the misguided notion that accommodating permanently higher inflation could purchase permanently higher employment.11 Other policymakers misperceived the level of the natural rate of unemployment, which we now believe had shifted up markedly in the 1960s.
With the higher natural rate, the labor market was much tighter and provided much greater upward pressure on inflation than policymakers realized in real time.
The channel through which monetary policy can amplify and extend inflation's response to shocks becomes even stronger when we take account of expectations.
If people come to expect that upward blips in inflation will result in ongoing higher inflation, they will build that view into wage and price decisions.
Arguably, this is why a federal funds rate near 20 percent--roughly 10 percent in real terms‑‑was required in the early 1980s to turn the tide on high inflation.
The cost, in the form of very high unemployment, is clear in the Great Inflation figures.
The Great Inflation taught us that a main task of monetary policy is to keep inflation expectations anchored at some low level.
This idea is behind the adoption in recent decades of inflation targets, such as the Fed's 2 percent objective, by central banks around the world.
When monetary policy tends to offset shocks to inflation, rather than amplifying and extending them, and when people come to expect this policy response, a surprise rise or fall in labor market tightness will naturally have smaller and less persistent effects on inflation.
Research suggests that this reasoning can account for a good deal of the change in the Phillips curve relationship.13 It is also likely that many other factors have contributed to changes in inflation dynamics over recent decades.
We do not fully understand the causes and implications of these changes, which raises risk management issues that I will take up now.14
To set the stage, let us return to the situation facing the FOMC.
The baseline forecasts of most FOMC participants and a broad range of others show unemployment remaining below 4 percent for an extended period, with inflation steady near 2 percent.
Instead, the outlook is consistent with evidence of a very flat Phillips curve and inflation expectations anchored near 2 percent.
As a way of heeding this advice, the Committee takes a risk management approach, which has three important parts: monitoring risks; balancing risks, both upside and downside; and contingency planning for surprises.
First is the risk that inflation expectations might lose their anchor.
We attribute a great deal of the stability of inflation in recent years to the anchoring of longer-term inflation expectations.
The survey measures have been particularly steady for some time.15 The financial market-based measures include both an expectations component and a volatile inflation premium component, so they tend to move around much more than the surveys, but we see no evidence of a material change in these measures, either.
The risks to inflation expectations are, of course, two sided.
Until this summer, inflation had remained stubbornly below 2 percent for several years.
Some argue the contrary case--that by only gradually removing accommodation as the unemployment rate has fallen, the FOMC may have fallen behind the curve, thereby risking an upward drift in expectations.
From the standpoint of contingency planning, our course is clear: Resolutely conduct policy consistent with the FOMC's symmetric 2 percent inflation objective, and stand ready to act with authority if expectations drift materially up or down.
Could Inflation Pressures Move up More than Expected in a Hot Economy?
A second risk is that labor market tightness or tightness in other parts of the production chain might lead to higher inflation pressure than expected--the "revenge of the Phillips curve" scenario.16 As I mentioned, the FOMC carefully monitors a wide array of early indicators of inflation pressure to evaluate this risk.
Wages and compensation data are one important source of information.
Specifically, the rise in wages is broadly consistent with observed rates of price inflation and labor productivity growth and therefore does not point to an overheating labor market.
The late 1990s episode of low unemployment saw wages rise faster than inflation plus productivity growth without an appreciable rise in inflation.
Despite what shows up in the aggregate wage and compensation data, however, I am sure that, like us, many of you are hearing widespread anecdotes about labor shortages and increasing bottlenecks in production.
For example, as shown in figure 7, the words "shortage" and "bottleneck" are increasingly appearing in the Beige Book, the Federal Reserve's report summarizing discussions with our business contacts around the country.17 The message we are hearing in our conversations is supported by a wide range of more conventional measures.
For example, the survey of members of the National Federation of Independent Business finds firms increasingly reporting that job openings are hard to fill (figure 8).
Further, these businesses now list "quality of labor" as their most important problem, as opposed to the more typical report of "poor sales."
We review a wide variety of measures of this type, and these indicators show what I think most business people see: an economy operating with limited slack.
Notice, however, that these measures are near levels that prevailed in the late 1990s or early 2000s, a period when core inflation remained under 2 percent.
Thus, the FOMC takes seriously the possibility that tight markets for labor or other inputs could provide greater upward pressure on inflation than in the baseline outlook.
Our best estimates, however, suggest that so long as inflation expectations remain anchored, a modest steepening of the Phillips curve would be unlikely to cause a significant rise in inflation or demand a disruptive policy tightening.18 Once again, the key is the anchored expectations.
A third risk--in this case an upside risk--is that the natural rate of unemployment could be even lower than current estimates.
Some have argued that the Fed should be removing policy accommodation much more slowly, pushing the economy to see if the natural rate of unemployment is lower still.
Advocates of this view note that over the past several years of policy normalization, the economy has continued to strengthen and unemployment has fallen, but inflation has remained quiet.
As I discussed in a recent speech, many analysts have accounted for the lack of rising inflation pressure by lowering their estimate of the natural rate.19 For example, since the start of 2016, the unemployment rate has fallen about 1 percentage point, and estimates of the natural rate from four well-known sources have fallen over that period between 0.3 percent and 0.7 percent (figure 9).
If the natural rate is now materially lower than we believe, that would imply less upward pressure on inflation--the flip side of the "revenge of the Phillips curve" risk.
Our policy of gradual interest rate normalization represents the FOMC's attempt to take both of these risks seriously.
Moving too slowly could risk rising inflation and inflation expectations.
Our path of gradually removing accommodation, while closely monitoring the economy, is designed to balance these risks.
To name just a few, we must consider the strength of economies abroad, the effects of ongoing trade disputes, and financial stability issues.
I hope my discussion of three particular risks gives a sense of how we approach these issues.
In light of that experience, I am glad to be able to stand here and say that the economy is strong, unemployment is near 50-year lows, and inflation is roughly at our 2 percent objective.
This historically rare pairing of steady, low inflation and very low unemployment is testament to the fact that we remain in extraordinary times.
Our ongoing policy of gradual interest rate normalization reflects our efforts to balance the inevitable risks that come with extraordinary times, so as to extend the current expansion, while maintaining maximum employment and low and stable inflation.
"Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting," speech delivered at the Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 10.
Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? (PDF)" Policy Brief PB16‑1.
"Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research," FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23.
"The Role of Expectations in Changed Inflation Dynamics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-062.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 23-25.
"The Evolution of Economic Understanding and Postwar Stabilization Policy (PDF)," paper presented at "Rethinking Stabilization Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 29-31.
"Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24.
"Inflation, Uncertainty, and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at "Prospects for Growth: Reassessing the Fundamentals," 59th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Cleveland, Ohio, September 26.
The unemployment rate for each forecast bottoms out at 3.4 percent or 3.5 percent in 2019 and remains below 4 percent.
Headline PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation is between 1.9 percent and 2.1 percent for all three years and forecasts.
For example, there have been four periods with quarterly average unemployment below 4 percent since 1950.
In an early 1950s episode, inflation ranged from below zero to 8 percent.
Toward the end of the 1950s, unemployment was near 4 percent for a time, dipping to 3.9 percent for one quarter.
During this low unemployment period, inflation rose steadily from under 1 percent to over 3 percent.
The remaining two episodes with unemployment under 4 percent--one each in the 1960s and 1990s--are discussed later in the speech.
Herb Stein (1998) made the analogous point that one should doubt the assertion that some program will "cause the economy to perform outside the range of its past experience" (p.
Unless otherwise noted, all statements about inflation will be four-quarter percent changes in quarterly average data, and all statements about unemployment will be about the quarterly average unemployment rate.
This estimate is the CBO's current assessment of what the natural rate was at each period in the sample, not a measure of the natural rate as perceived in real time.
The text refers to when C is less than 1, in which case a rise in inflation would ultimately die out on its own.
When C is 1, the Phillips curve is of the "accelerationist" variety, and any offsetting rise in inflation due to labor market tightness would be permanent unless offset by an equal amount of subsequent slack.
The account I present of the role of anchored expectations in stabilizing the economy and favorably altering Phillips curve dynamics echoes a long-held view at the Fed.
To be clear, during the periods of rising inflation in the 1960s and 1970s, the FOMC was generally raising the federal funds rate, but with inflation rising, the real federal funds rate was rising much more slowly or even falling.
In this sense, the effective stance of policy was tightening slowly or was easing.
Yellen (2017) gives a more detailed account of how a very flat Phillips curve with anchored expectations can account well for the recent inflation and unemployment data.
Many changes not directly related to policy might nonetheless have been precipitated by the improvement in policy.
For example, Pfajfar and Roberts, (2018) present evidence that when inflation is more stable, people simply pay less attention to it and that this could help account for changes in the Phillips curve relationship.
It is unclear whether the number of important words like "shortage" would have been affected by that redesign, but if so, it would go in the direction of holding down the observed recent increase.


The Federal Open Market Committee, the body within the Federal Reserve that sets monetary policy, just concluded a meeting yesterday.
I plan to talk briefly about how my colleagues and I see the economy evolving and our role in keeping it healthy.
I very much appreciate your views, as business people, of economic conditions where you live and work.
Unemployment is low, the number of people working is rising steadily, and wages are up.
The benefits of this strong economy have not reached all Americans.
Many of our country's economic challenges are beyond the scope of the Fed, but we are doing all we can to keep the economy strong and moving forward.
Each time we meet, we face the same question: How can we set monetary policy to best support job growth and low, steady inflation? For many years, this question called for very low interest rates to help an economy that had been damaged by the deep financial crisis that gripped the world 10 years ago.
As the economy has steadily gained strength, the Fed has been gradually returning interest rates closer to the levels that are normal in a healthy economy.
We took another step on that path yesterday, with a quarter-point increase in short-term interest rates.
These rates remain low, and my colleagues and I believe that this gradual return to normal is helping to sustain this strong economy for the longer-run benefit of all Americans.
In addition to holding interest rates low to support the recovery, we have taken many steps to make the financial system safer.
In particular, we are holding the largest banks to much higher standards in the amount of capital and liquidity they hold and in the ways they assess and manage the risks they take.
I am confident that the system today is stronger and in a far better position to support the financial needs of households and businesses through good times and bad.
We continue to work to sustain these fundamental improvements while also ensuring that regulation is both effective and efficient.

What Do We Mean by Neutral and What Role Does It Play in Monetary Policy?
I started my career working here in the Motor City, and I have followed the fortunes of this area with interest ever since.
While challenges remain in many of the city's neighborhoods, since that time the metropolitan area overall has seen signs of a rebound in business activity and investment, and the unemployment rate has continued to trend downward, recently falling to 4.3 percent.1
While challenges remain for many, aggregate growth is strong, and the economy is meeting our full employment and inflation objectives.
Given the outlook, it comes as no surprise that the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has been gradually raising interest rates from crisis-era lows and sees further gradual increases as likely to be appropriate in its most recent statement.2 Before discussing the outlook, it might be useful to first explore some concepts that are important in informing the path of rates.
In thinking about how we should set the federal funds rate, many policymakers and economists find the concept of the neutral rate of interest to be a useful frame of reference.
So, what does the neutral rate mean? Intuitively, I think of the nominal neutral interest rate as the level of the federal funds rate that keeps output growing around its potential rate in an environment of full employment and stable inflation.3
Focusing first on the "shorter-run" neutral rate, this does not stay fixed, but rather fluctuates along with important changes in economic conditions.
For instance, legislation that increases the budget deficit through tax cuts and spending increases can be expected to generate tailwinds to domestic demand and thus to push up the shorter-run neutral interest rate.
Heightened risk appetite among investors similarly can be expected to push up the shorter-run neutral rate.
Conversely, many of the forces that contributed to the financial crisis--such as fear and uncertainty on the part of businesses and households--can be expected to lower the neutral rate of interest, as can declines in foreign demand for U.S.
In many circumstances, monetary policy can help keep the economy on its sustainable path at full employment by adjusting the policy rate to reflect movements in the shorter-run neutral rate.
In this context, the appropriate reference for assessing the stance of monetary policy is the gap between the policy rate and the nominal shorter-run neutral rate.
So far, I have been focusing on the shorter-run neutral rate of interest that is responsive to headwinds or tailwinds to demand.
The underlying concept of the "longer run" generally refers to the output growing at its longer-run trend, after transitory forces reflecting headwinds or tailwinds have played out, in an environment of full employment and inflation running at the FOMC objective.4
The longer-run federal funds rate estimated by FOMC participants in their Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) meets the definition of a longer-run equilibrium rate of interest.5 It is worth highlighting that the longer-run federal funds rate is the only neutral interest rate reported in the FOMC projections.
But the shorter-run neutral rate, rather than the longer-run federal funds rate, is the relevant benchmark for assessing the near-term path of monetary policy in the presence of headwinds or tailwinds.
Similar to other equilibrium macroeconomic concepts such as potential gross domestic product (GDP) and the natural rate of unemployment, the shorter- and longer-run levels of the neutral rate are not directly observable, so they must be estimated or inferred from the movements of variables that are observed, such as market interest rates, inflation, the unemployment rate, and GDP.6 In recent years, considerable work has derived estimates of the longer-run equilibrium rate, in some cases using statistical techniques that can be thought of as capturing the highly persistent component of the neutral rate.
The central tendency of those estimates suggests that the longer-run trend rate is in the range of 2.5 to 3.5 percent in nominal terms.7 This range lines up well with the most recent median estimate of the longer-run federal funds rate in the FOMC SEP, which is just below 3 percent.
By these estimates, the longer-run neutral rate has fallen considerably from the estimated range in earlier decades of 4 to 5 percent.8
Turning to the shorter-run neutral rate, although the estimates are model dependent and uncertain, we can make some general inferences about its recent evolution that are largely independent of the details of specific models.9 Estimates suggest the shorter-run neutral rate tends to be cyclical, falling in recessions and rising during expansions, and our current expansion appears to be no exception.10
Last year, the unemployment rate returned to pre-crisis levels, which required real interest rates that were below zero for nearly 10 years.11 This year, the unemployment rate has fallen further, and job market gains have gathered strength, at the same time that the federal funds rate has increased.
This combination suggests that the short-run neutral interest rate likely has also increased.
If, instead, the neutral rate had remained constant as the federal funds rate increased, we would have expected to see labor market gains slow.
That inference is consistent with the formal model estimates, which indicate that the shorter-run neutral rate has gone up as the expansion has advanced.
This is also suggested by the observation that overall financial conditions, as measured by a variety of indexes, have remained quite accommodative during a period when the federal funds rate has been moving higher.
In the latest FOMC SEP median path, by the end of next year, the federal funds rate is projected to rise to a level that exceeds the longer-run federal funds rate during a time when real GDP growth is projected to exceed its longer-run pace and unemployment continues to fall.
The shift from headwinds to tailwinds may be expected to push the shorter-run neutral rate above its longer-run trend in the next year or two, just as it fell below the longer-run equilibrium rate following the financial crisis.
Notably, the sizable fiscal stimulus in the pipeline is likely to continue to bolster the short-run neutral rate over the next two years.
The relatively rich level of current asset valuations relative to historical levels is another factor that could push the short-run neutral rate above its longer-run value.
As was noted in the recent FOMC minutes, corporate credit spreads are very narrow, and equity valuations are elevated relative to historical patterns, even after taking into account the low level of interest rates.12 Business and consumer confidence is high, which is also consistent with a higher shorter-run neutral rate of interest.
By any measure, overall growth in the second quarter was strong.
Looking ahead, it seems likely that growth will remain solid.
Confidence is high, private domestic demand momentum is solid, and recent fiscal stimulus will continue to work its way through the economy, at least for the next year or so.
So far this year, payroll gains have averaged more than 200,000 per month, a step-up from the 2017 pace and well above estimates of the pace necessary to absorb new entrants into the labor force.
These developments are heartening, suggesting the tight labor market is providing employment opportunities to more Americans.
In another encouraging development, wage gains in the August report reached their highest level since the depth of the financial crisis, although wage growth remains moderate by historical standards.
At 3.9 percent, the August unemployment rate was about 1/2 percentage point lower than the previous year.
If unemployment continues to decline at the same rate as we have seen over the past year, we will soon see unemployment rates not seen since the 1960s.
Historically, the few periods when resource utilization has been at similarly tight levels have tended to see elevated risks of either accelerating inflation or financial imbalances.13 For instance, the inflation process may change in unexpected ways.
So far, the data on inflation remain encouraging, providing little signal of an outbreak of inflation to the upside, on the one hand, and some reassurance that underlying trend inflation may be moving closer to 2 percent, on the other.
Survey measures of inflation expectations remain stable in the lower end of the historical ranges, while market-based measures of inflation compensation remain stable at levels above the lows seen in 2016.
With various measures of underlying trend inflation having come in below our 2 percent objective over a sustained period, it is important to sustainably achieve inflation around 2 percent to prevent an erosion of underlying trend inflation the next time the economy faces a downturn and the federal funds rate hits its lower limit.14
The past few times unemployment fell to levels as low as those projected over the next year, signs of overheating showed up in financial-sector imbalances rather than in accelerating inflation.
The Federal Reserve's assessment suggests that financial vulnerabilities are building, which might be expected after a long period of economic expansion and very low interest rates.
Rising risks are notable in the corporate sector, where low spreads and loosening credit terms are mirrored by rising indebtedness among corporations that could be vulnerable to downgrades in the event of unexpected adverse developments.
Leveraged lending is again on the rise; spreads on leveraged loans and the securitized products backed by those loans are low, and the Board's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices suggests that underwriting standards for leveraged loans may be declining to levels not seen since 2005.
While tightening resource utilization and loose financial conditions present upside risks, recent foreign developments present downside risks.
Growth in Europe and Japan has moderated from its strong pace of last year, and political risks have reemerged in countries such as Italy.
growth has pulled away from foreign growth, in part reflecting fiscal policy divergence, expectations of monetary policy divergence strengthened, contributing to upward pressure on the dollar earlier this year.
The resulting currency adjustments are compounding challenges faced by some emerging market economies, along with a complicated and unpredictable trade environment and gradually increasing interest rates.
Although capital flow reversals have been contained to several notably vulnerable countries so far, I am attentive to the risk that a pullback from emerging markets could broaden.
What are the implications for policy? Over the next year or two, barring unexpected developments, continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate are likely to be appropriate to sustain full employment and inflation near its objective.
With government stimulus in the pipeline providing tailwinds to demand over the next two years, it appears reasonable to expect the shorter-run neutral rate to rise somewhat higher than the longer-run neutral rate.
Further out, the policy path will depend on how the economy evolves.
These developments raise the prospect that, at some point, the Committee's setting of the federal funds rate will exceed current estimates of the longer-run federal funds rate.
Like many of you, I am attentive to the historical observation that inversions of the yield curve between the 3-month and 10-year Treasury rates have had a relatively reliable track record of preceding recessions in the United States.16 But unlike these historical episodes, today the current 10-year yield is very low at around 3 percent, which is well below the average of 6-1/4 percent during the decades before the crisis.
Part of the reason the 10-year Treasury yield is unusually low is that market expectations of interest rates in the longer run are themselves quite low, as discussed earlier.
Another important reason the 10-year Treasury yield is very low is that the term premium has fallen to levels that are very low by historical standards.
According to one estimate from Federal Reserve staff, the term premium has been slightly negative until very recently and remains very low.17 By contrast, it was close to 100 basis points when the spread between the 3-month and 10-year Treasury yields was at its peak of 325 basis points in early 2010.
If the term premium remains very low, any given amount of monetary policy tightening will lead to an inversion sooner so that even a modest tightening that might not have led to an inversion historically could do so today.
One reason the term premium may be lower than in the past is the changed correlation between stock and bond returns, likely associated with changes in expected inflation outcomes.18 The other driver of the low level of the term premium globally is the asset purchases of central banks in several major economies.19 In this case, if the term premium rises as the effect of asset purchase programs diminishes, the effect may be to forestall an inversion of the long-dated yield curve.
It is worth highlighting that the flattening yield curve suggested by the SEP median is associated with a policy path calibrated to sustain full employment and inflation around target.
So, while I will keep a close watch on the yield curve as an important signal on financial conditions, I will want to interpret yield curve movements as one of several considerations informing appropriate policy.
Indeed, the possibility that the projected policy path may have unintended consequences is one of the compelling reasons for raising interest rates gradually.
The gradual pace of interest rate increases anticipated in the SEP median path should give us some time to assess the effects of our policies as we proceed.
If, for example, underlying inflation were to move abruptly and unexpectedly higher, it might be appropriate to depart from the gradual path.
Stable inflation expectations is one of the key achievements of central banks in the past several decades, and we would defend it vigorously.
Our challenge is to sustain full employment and inflation at 2 percent, which is likely to warrant continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate.
With fiscal stimulus in the pipeline and financial conditions supportive of growth, the shorter-run neutral interest rate is likely to move up somewhat further, and it may well surpass the longer-run equilibrium rate for some period.
Beyond the near term, how much the neutral rate is likely to rise and whether it flattens or moderates further out will depend on a variety of developments--such as whether fiscal stimulus is extended or expires, whether foreign and trade risks grow or recede, and whether financial system vulnerabilities extend.
As such, the gradual pace of rate increases implicit in the SEP's median policy path incorporates a degree of caution, which is appropriate, in my view.
"Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 31-August 1, 2018," press release, August 22.
"Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1.
"Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5.
"Navigating Monetary Policy as Headwinds Shift to Tailwinds," speech delivered at the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, March 6.
"Has the Inflation Risk Premium Fallen? Is It Now Negative?" FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 4.
and German Bond Yields (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1226.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Why So Slow? A Gradual Return for Interest Rates," FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-32.
"Why Are Interest Rates So Low?" Liberty Street Economics, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, May 20.
"Natural Rate Measures in an Estimated DSGE Model of the U.S.
"The Predictive Power of the Term Structure of Interest Rates in Europe and the United States: Implications for the European Central Bank," European Economic Review, vol.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 8.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," Journal of International Economics, vol.
"The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 1.
"What Can the Data Tell Us about the Equilibrium Real Interest Rate? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-077.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September (revised December 2011).
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest (PDF)," Review of Economics and Statistics 85(4), 1063-1070.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: A Note on Transitory Shocks (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-059.
"Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Calculating the Natural Rate of Interest: A Comparison of Two Alternative Approaches," Richmond Fed Economic Brief, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Oct, pages 1-6.
"Monetary Policy in a Changing Economy," speech delivered at "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 24.
"The Outlook, Uncertainty, and Monetary Policy," speech delivered to The Economic Club of New York, March 29.
I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
The closely related concept of the natural rate of interest--the rate of interest at which investment and savings are equilibrated at full employment--is originally attributed to Swedish economist Knut Wicksell.
The natural rate and the neutral rate are closely related concepts whose technical differences matter for economic theory and estimation, but less for the intuitive discussion here.
As defined in the FOMC SEP, "Longer-run projections represent each participant's assessment of the rate to which each variable would be expected to converge under appropriate monetary policy and in the absence of further shocks to the economy." See the most recent SEP, an addendum to the minutes of the June 2018 FOMC meeting, available in a July 5, 2018, press release on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20180705a.htm.
See Kiley (2015); Johannsen and Mertens (2016); Holston, Laubach, and Williams (2017); Laubach and Williams (2003) (current estimates available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website at https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/research/economists/williams/data/Laubach_Williams_current_estimates.xlsx); Lewis and Vazquez-Grande (2017); and Lubik and Matthes (2015).
A variety of hypotheses have been advanced to explain this decline, including slower labor force growth, slower productivity growth, and an increase in savings propensities.
Estimates of real natural rates of interest based on dynamic stochastic general equilibrium models include Del Negro and others (2015) and Edge, Kiley, and Laforte (2008).
The standard expectations hypothesis model decomposes longer-term interest rates into a component that represents the influence of expectations of future short-term interest rates and a "term premium." Most estimates of the term premium, which are model-based, suggest that term premiums have been very low recently, and some suggest that term premiums are roughly zero across the yield curve.
If term premiums remain low and stable, the component associated with expectations of future short-term interest rates will dominate movements in long-term interest rates.

At "Changing Market Structure and Implications for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming
Fifteen years ago, during the period now referred to as the Great Moderation, the topic of this symposium was "Adapting to a Changing Economy." In opening the proceedings, then-Chairman Alan Greenspan famously declared that "uncertainty is not just an important feature of the monetary policy landscape; it is the defining characteristic of that landscape."1 On the doorstep of the period now referred to as the Global Financial Crisis, surely few, if any, at that symposium would have imagined how shockingly different the next 15 years would be from the 15 years that preceded it.
The unemployment rate has declined steadily for almost nine years and, at 3.9 percent, is now near a 20-year low.
Inflation has moved up and is now near the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) objective of 2 percent after running generally below that level for six years.
As the economy has strengthened, the FOMC has gradually raised the federal funds rate from its crisis-era low near zero toward more normal levels.
We are also allowing our securities holdings--assets acquired to support the economy during the deep recession and the long recovery--to decline gradually as these securities are paid off.
As always, there are risk factors abroad and at home that, in time, could demand a different policy response, but today I will step back from these.
In keeping with the spirit of this year's symposium topic--the changing structures of the economy--I would also note briefly that the U.S.
economy faces a number of longer-term structural challenges that are mostly beyond the reach of monetary policy.
Economic mobility in the United States has declined and is now lower than in most other advanced economies.2 Addressing the federal budget deficit, which has long been on an unsustainable path, becomes increasingly important as a larger share of the population retires.
Finally, it is difficult to say when or whether the economy will break out of its low-productivity mode of the past decade or more, as it must if incomes are to rise meaningfully over time.
My FOMC colleagues and I believe that we can best support progress on these longer-term issues by pursuing the Federal Reserve's mandate and supporting continued economic growth, a strong labor market, and inflation near 2 percent.
I will focus today on one of the many facets of uncertainty discussed at the 2003 symposium--uncertainty around the location of important macroeconomic variables such as the natural rate of unemployment.
A good place to start is with two opposing questions that regularly arise in discussions of monetary policy both inside and outside the Fed:
With the unemployment rate well below estimates of its longer-term normal level, why isn't the FOMC tightening monetary policy more sharply to head off overheating and inflation?
With no clear sign of an inflation problem, why is the FOMC tightening policy at all, at the risk of choking off job growth and continued expansion?
As I will discuss, the job of avoiding these errors is made challenging today because the economy has been changing in ways that are difficult to detect and measure in real time.
I will then use that framework to explain the role that structural change plays in our current policy deliberations, focusing on how that role has been shaped by two historical episodes.
In conventional models of the economy, major economic quantities such as inflation, unemployment, and the growth rate of gross domestic product (GDP) fluctuate around values that are considered "normal," or "natural," or "desired." The FOMC has chosen a 2 percent inflation objective as one of these desired values.
In the FOMC's quarterly Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), participants state their individual views on the longer-run normal values for the growth rate of GDP, the unemployment rate, and the federal funds rate.
These fundamental structural features of the economy are also known by more familiar names such as the "natural rate of unemployment" and "potential output growth." The longer-run federal funds rate minus long-run inflation is the "neutral real interest rate." At the Fed and elsewhere, analysts talk about these values so often that they have acquired shorthand names.
For example, u* (pronounced "u star") is the natural rate of unemployment, r* ("r star") is the neutral real rate of interest, and Π* ("pi star") is the inflation objective.
For example, the famous Taylor rule calls for setting the federal funds rate based on where inflation and unemployment stand in relation to the stars.4 If inflation is higher than Π*, raise the real federal funds rate relative to r*.
The higher real interest rate will, through various channels, tend to moderate spending by businesses and households, which will reduce upward pressure on prices and wages as the economy cools off.
In contrast, if the unemployment rate is above u*, lower the real federal funds rate relative to r*, which will stimulate spending and raise employment.
Guiding policy by the stars in practice, however, has been quite challenging of late because our best assessments of the location of the stars have been changing significantly.
In December 2013, the FOMC began winding down the final crisis-era asset purchase program.
Asset purchases declined to zero over 2014, and in December 2015, the FOMC began the gradual normalization of interest rates that continues to this day.
Many projections of the natural rate of unemployment fell roughly 1 full percentage point, as did assessments of the neutral interest rate.
Estimates of the potential growth rate of GDP slipped about 1/2 percentage point.
For example, the 1 percentage point fall in the neutral interest rate implies that the federal funds rate was considerably closer to its longer-run normal and, hence, that policy was less accommodative than thought at the beginning of normalization.
The 1 percentage point fall in the natural rate of unemployment implies at present that about 1.6 million more people would have jobs when unemployment is at its longer-run level.
For example, as the unemployment rate fell toward, and then below, estimates of its natural rate, many expected inflation to move up.
When inflation instead moved sideways, a reasonable inference was that the natural rate was lower than previously thought.
Further, over this period, GDP growth was slower than one might have expected based on the rapid decline in unemployment and the well-known relationship between output and unemployment known as Okun's law.
Put another way, labor productivity growth consistently disappointed, which raised the question of whether that shortfall was temporary‑‑perhaps due to headwinds from the crisis--or was part of a new normal.
To return to the nautical metaphor, the FOMC has been navigating between the shoals of overheating and premature tightening with only a hazy view of what seem to be shifting navigational guides.
Our approach to this challenge has been shaped by two much discussed historical episodes--the Great Inflation of the 1960s and 1970s and the "new economy" period of the late 1990s.
Figure 2 illustrates the Congressional Budget Office's (CBO) current estimate of movements in the natural rate of unemployment and potential GDP growth from 1960 to 2000.5 Viewed against the ups and downs observed over these four decades, the recent shifts in longer-run values are not all that dramatic.
Of course, these CBO estimates benefit from many years of hindsight, whereas monetary policy must be based on assessments made in real time.
The Great Inflation period vividly illustrates the difficulties this difference raises.
Around 1965, the United States entered a period of high and volatile inflation that ended with inflation in double digits in the early 1980s.
Multiple factors, including monetary policy errors, contributed to the Great Inflation.
Many researchers have concluded that a key mistake was that monetary policymakers placed too much emphasis on imprecise--and, as it turns out, overly optimistic--real-time estimates of the natural rate of unemployment.6
Figure 3 compares the CBO's current view of the natural rate of unemployment in that era with an estimate by Athanasios Orphanides and John Williams of the rate as policymakers perceived it in real time.
The unemployment rate over this period was generally well above the real-time natural rate, and contemporary documents reveal that policymakers were wary of pushing the unemployment rate even further above u* (figure 4, top panel).7 With the benefit of hindsight, we now think that, except for a few years in the mid-1970s, the labor market was tight and contributing to inflation's rise (figure 4, lower panel).
It is now clear that the FOMC had placed too much emphasis on its imprecise estimates of u* and too little emphasis on evidence of rising inflation expectations.
The Great Inflation did, however, prompt an "expectations revolution" in macroeconomic thinking, with one overwhelmingly important lesson for monetary policymakers: Anchoring longer-term inflation expectations is a vital precondition for reaching all other monetary policy goals.8
When longer-term inflation expectations are anchored, unanticipated developments may push inflation up or down, but people expect that inflation will return fairly promptly to the desired value.
This is the key insight at the heart of the widespread adoption of inflation targeting by central banks in the wake of the Great Inflation.
Anchored expectations give a central bank greater flexibility to stabilize both unemployment and inflation.
When a central bank acts to stimulate the economy to bring down unemployment, inflation might push above the bank's inflation target.
With expectations anchored, people expect the central bank to pursue policies that bring inflation back down, and longer-term inflation expectations do not rise.
Thus, policy can be a bit more accommodative than if policymakers had to offset a rise in longer-term expectations.
In mid-1996, the unemployment rate was below the natural rate as perceived in real time, and many FOMC participants and others were forecasting growth above the economy's potential.
Sentiment was building on the FOMC to raise the federal funds rate to head off the risk of rising inflation.9 But Chairman Greenspan had a hunch that the United States was experiencing the wonders of a "new economy" in which improved productivity growth would allow faster output growth and lower unemployment, without serious inflation risks.
Greenspan argued that the FOMC should hold off on rate increases.
Over the next two years, thanks to his considerable fortitude, Greenspan prevailed, and the FOMC raised the federal funds rate only once from mid-1996 through late 1998.10 Starting in 1996, the economy boomed and the unemployment rate fell, but, contrary to conventional wisdom at the time, inflation fell.11
Whereas during the Great Inflation period the real-time natural rate of unemployment had been well below our current-day assessment, in the new-economy period, this relation was reversed (figure 3).
The labor market looked to be tight and getting tighter in real time, but in retrospect, we estimate that there was slack in the labor market in 1996 and early 1997, and the labor market only tightened appreciably through 1998 (figure 4).
Greenspan was also right that the potential growth rate had shifted up.
With hindsight, we recognize today that higher potential growth could accommodate the very strong growth that actually materialized, let alone the moderate growth policymakers were forecasting.12
Under Chairman Greenspan's leadership, the Committee converged on a risk-management strategy that can be distilled into a simple request: Let's wait one more meeting; if there are clearer signs of inflation, we will commence tightening.13 Meeting after meeting, the Committee held off on rate increases while believing that signs of rising inflation would soon appear.
In retrospect, it may seem odd that it took great fortitude to defend "let's wait one more meeting," given that inflation was low and falling.
Conventional wisdom at the time, however, still urged policymakers to respond preemptively to inflation risk--even when that risk was gleaned mainly from hazy, real-time assessments of the stars.
With the experience in the new-economy period, policymakers were beginning to appreciate that, with inflation expectations much better anchored than before, there was a smaller risk that an inflation uptick under Greenspan's "wait and see" approach would become a significant problem.
Given what the economy has shown us over the past 15 years, the need for the sort of risk‑management approach that originated in the new-economy era is clearer than ever before.
That approach continues to evolve based on experience and the growing literature on monetary policy and structural uncertainty.
Experience has revealed two realities about the relation between inflation and unemployment, and these bear directly on the two questions I started with.
In particular, we now know that the level of the unemployment rate relative to our real-time estimate of u* will sometimes be a misleading indicator of the state of the economy or of future inflation.
Second, the reverse also seems to be true: Inflation may no longer be the first or best indicator of a tight labor market and rising pressures on resource utilization.
Part of the reason inflation sends a weaker signal is undoubtedly the achievement of anchored inflation expectations and the related flattening of the Phillips curve.14 Whatever the cause, in the run-up to the past two recessions, destabilizing excesses appeared mainly in financial markets rather than in inflation.
Thus, risk management suggests looking beyond inflation for signs of excesses.
The literature on uncertainty reviewed at the 2003 symposium--and much refined since then--provides important advice for how policy should respond, although not yet, in my view, an explicit recipe or rule that a prudent central bank should follow.15 The literature on robust rules, such as so-called difference rules, for example, supports the idea of putting less emphasis on the level of unemployment relative to u*.16 The FOMC's practice of looking at a broad range of indicators when assessing the state of the labor market has explicitly been part of the FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy since its inception in 2012.17 We have greatly expanded the scope of our surveillance for signs of labor market tightness and of destabilizing excesses more generally.
The risks from misperceiving the stars also now play a prominent role in the FOMC's deliberations.
A paper by Federal Reserve Board staff is a recent example of a range of research that helps FOMC participants visualize and manage these risks.18 The research reports simulations of the economic outcomes that might result under various policy rules and policymaker misperceptions about the economy.
One general finding is that no single, simple approach to monetary policy is likely to be appropriate across a broad range of plausible scenarios.19 More concretely, simulations like these inform our risk management by assessing the likelihood that misperception would lead to adverse outcomes, such as inflation falling below zero or rising above 5 percent.
As Brainard made clear, this is not a universal truth, and recent research highlights two particularly important cases in which doing too little comes with higher costs than doing too much.
The first case is when attempting to avoid severely adverse events such as a financial crisis or an extended period with interest rates at the effective lower bound.21 In such situations, the famous words "We will do whatever it takes" will likely be more effective than "We will take cautious steps toward doing whatever it takes." The second case is when inflation expectations threaten to become unanchored.
If expectations were to begin to drift, the reality or expectation of a weak initial response could exacerbate the problem.22 I am confident that the FOMC would resolutely "do whatever it takes" should inflation expectations drift materially up or down or should crisis again threaten.
In addition, a decade of regulatory reforms and private-sector advances have greatly increased the strength and resilience of the financial system, with the aim of reducing the likelihood that the inevitable financial shocks will become crises.
Despite differing views on these questions and others, we have a long institutional tradition of finding common ground in coalescing around a policy stance.
I see the current path of gradually raising interest rates as the FOMC's approach to taking seriously both of these risks.
While the unemployment rate is below the Committee's estimate of the longer-run natural rate, estimates of this rate are quite uncertain.
The same is true of estimates of the neutral interest rate.
We therefore refer to many indicators when judging the degree of slack in the economy or the degree of accommodation in the current policy stance.
We are also aware that, over time, inflation has become much less responsive to changes in resource utilization.
While inflation has recently moved up near 2 percent, we have seen no clear sign of an acceleration above 2 percent, and there does not seem to be an elevated risk of overheating.
This is good news, and we believe that this good news results in part from the ongoing normalization process, which has moved the stance of policy gradually closer to the FOMC's rough assessment of neutral as the expansion has continued.
As the most recent FOMC statement indicates, if the strong growth in income and jobs continues, further gradual increases in the target range for the federal funds rate will likely be appropriate.
Inflation is near our 2 percent objective, and most people who want a job are finding one.
My colleagues and I are carefully monitoring incoming data, and we are setting policy to do what monetary policy can do to support continued growth, a strong labor market, and inflation near 2 percent.
"Inflation Expectations and Inflation Forecasting," speech delivered at the Monetary Economics Workshop of the National Bureau of Economic Research Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 10.
"Understanding the Greenspan Standard (PDF)," paper presented at "The Greenspan Era: Lessons for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 25-27.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (various years).
"Monetary Policy Report to the Congress (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol.
"Monetary Policy Report to the Congress (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol.
"Monetary Policy Report to the Congress (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol.
"Federal Open Market Committee Reaffirms Its 'Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,'" press release, January 31.
"Uncertainty and the Effectiveness of Policy," American Economic Review, vol.
"The Anguish of Central Banking (PDF)," speech delivered at the 16th annual Per Jacobssen Lecture, Belgrade, September 30.
"Where Is the Land of Opportunity? The Geography of Intergenerational Mobility in the United States," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
"Some Implications of Uncertainty and Misperception for Monetary Policy (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2018-059.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August, https://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2018.059.
"Overview (PDF)," panel remarks delivered at "Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 28-30.
"Overview (PDF)," panel remarks delivered at "Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 28-30.
"Opening Remarks (PDF)," speech delivered at "Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 28-30.
"Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research," FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23.
"Monetary Policy Objectives and Strategy," speech delivered at the 38th Annual Meeting of the National Association of Business Economists, Boston, September 8.
"Monetary Policy Mistakes and the Evolution of Inflation Expectations," in Michael D.
Bordo and Athanasios Orphanides, eds., The Great Inflation: The Rebirth of Modern Central Banking.
"Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"The Evolution of Economic Understanding and Postwar Stabilization Policy (PDF)," paper presented at "Rethinking Stabilization Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 29-31.
"Commentary: The Evolution of Economic Understanding and Postwar Stabilization Policy (PDF)," paper presented at "Rethinking Stabilization Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 29-31.
"Monetary Policy with Uncertain Parameters," Scandinavian Journal of Economics, vol.
"Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy, vol.
"Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy," in Benjamin M.
Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol.
"Implications of a Changing Economic Structure for the Strategy of Monetary Policy (PDF)," paper presented at "Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 28-30.
"Embracing Uncertainty in the Conduct of Monetary Policy (PDF)," speech delivered to the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, November 15.
"Overview (PDF)," panel remarks delivered at "Monetary Policy and Uncertainty: Adapting to a Changing Economy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 28-30.
"Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, September 24.
The challenges that I will highlight are, in my view, made more difficult, and the case for a careful risk-management approach made stronger, by the need to consider both short-run and long-run versions of the stars.
The original Taylor rule (Taylor, 1993) uses output relative to potential in place of unemployment relative to its natural rate.
There is no dispute, however, that policymakers did misperceive the natural unemployment rate, and Orphanides and Williams show that misperception of the natural rate of unemployment alone would have been sufficient on its own to generate outcomes like the Great Inflation.
Many central bankers have made this case; see, for example, Bernanke (2007) and Yellen (2015).
This account is drawn from several accounts of the period: Blinder and Yellen (2001), Blinder and Reis (2005), Meyer (1996), Meyer (2004), and the Federal Reserve's Bluebook documents from June 1996 through December 1998 (Board of Governors, various years).
In the second half of 1998, a Russian debt default and other ongoing financial instability in Asia intervened, and the FOMC rapidly lowered the federal funds rate 3/4 percentage point.
By current data, over the eight quarters starting in 1996:Q3, core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation fell from 1.8 percent to 1.3 percent.
During this period, FOMC participants submitted six-quarter forecasts each July as part of the Fed's semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress.
Each July from 1996 through 1998, the FOMC forecast growth very close to or above the real-time estimates of potential growth.
The forecast growth is well below current estimates of potential output growth.
For the forecasts, see Board of Governors (1996, 1997, 1998).
Note that the robust rules literature does not suggest ignoring the general notion of labor market tightness or of resource utilization more generally.
Indeed, robust rules often reflect tightness through the change in the unemployment rate.
Instead, the issue is about how best to take account of labor market tightness when the best estimates of u* are very imprecise.
When following a standard Taylor rule and facing a very flat Phillips curve, for example, it is not always good advice to lower the weight on the gap between unemployment and u* and to raise the weight on inflation in making policy.


At the Alternative Reference Rates Committee Roundtable, The Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York (via prerecorded video)
I am sorry that I cannot be with you in person for this third roundtable hosted by the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC), but I wanted to tape these remarks to make clear the Federal Reserve's full commitment to mitigating the risk to financial stability should a key reference rate cease to be available.
And support for the ARRC is not limited to the Federal Reserve System: the Bureau of Consumer Financial Protection, Commodity Futures Trading Commission, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Federal Housing Finance Agency, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Office of Financial Research, Securities and Exchange Commission, and U.S.
The Federal Reserve began its role in co-chairing the Financial Stability Board's working group on interest rate benchmarks and joined in international efforts to strengthen LIBOR following reports that employees at several banks sought to manipulate these rates.
On most days, the banks that submit to LIBOR have been forced to rely on their own judgement and models in submitting to LIBOR rather than actual transactions.
Many of them have become justifiably uncomfortable with a system that pins hundreds of trillions of dollars' worth of financial contracts to that type of judgement call.
People may have some general sense of this, but because IBA does not release data on the transactions that actually underlie LIBOR, many may not be aware of how truly thin these markets have become.
At the last roundtable, Jay Powell showed data on the volume of borrowing in wholesale unsecured U.S.
By way of comparison, we estimate that there are roughly $200 trillion of financial securities referencing U.S.
These data are based on the information available to the Federal Reserve, which is fairly comprehensive but still may differ in some respects from that available to IBA, so I should caution that this is merely an informed estimate of the number of transactions underlying U.S.
On average, we observe six or seven transactions per day at market rates that could underpin one- and three-month LIBOR across all of the panel banks.
The secured overnight financing rate (SOFR) has only been in existence three months, and SOFR futures have only been trading for two months, but on a daily basis there are already more transactions underlying them than there are underpinning LIBOR.
One of the many benefits of using a rate so firmly anchored in a market of this depth is that no one can question whether SOFR is representative.
With LIBOR reliant on expert judgment rather than direct transactions, many banks increasingly uncomfortable providing that judgment, and the official sector unable to compel them to do so indefinitely, it was obvious to us that this structure--which bases so many trillions of financial instruments on such a small number of underlying transactions--was potentially unstable.
It was clear that the market needed to develop alternatives in case the worst happened, and this was the reason that we convened the ARRC four years ago.
We asked the ARRC to identify a robust alternative to U.S.
When the ARRC started, the interest rate benchmarks that they would eventually narrow their choice down to did not even exist.
Those rates have not been easy to create, and as the ARRC expressed interest in a Treasury repo rate benchmark that would span the widest possible scope of the market, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York put great effort in working with the Federal Reserve Board and Office of Financial Research to create SOFR.
The result, the rate the ARRC has chosen, reflects the largest and deepest rates market in the world and is a huge accomplishment for all of us.
These are steps that the private sector must lead, and they have, but it is important that the public sector encourage the development of SOFR markets where it can.
regulators asking us to consider exemptions for legacy swaps seeking to incorporate the International Swaps and Derivatives Association's protocol or exemptions for amending to move from LIBOR to SOFR, and these are issues that we should look at seriously; we should avoid placing unintended hurdles in the way of those who may seek to transition from LIBOR.
That is the reason that it has added the creation of a forward-looking term rate as the final step in its Paced Transition Plan.
As the ARRC has noted and the Financial Stability Board has now reiterated, this kind of forward-looking term rate will be useful in facilitating a transition away from LIBOR in some cash markets, such as corporate loans, but it is not primarily intended for use in derivatives markets.
In fact, we have to encourage use of SOFR in derivatives markets to the fullest extent possible if a robust forward-looking term rate is to be created.
The European Investment Bank's recent announcement that it would issue a floating rate note paying a compound average of Sterling Overnight Index Average (SONIA) shows that this can be done.1 In the spirit of encouraging this type of use of SOFR, I think it is appropriate for the Federal Reserve to consider publishing a compound average of SOFR that market participants could then use.
Publishing a compound average rate that encourages broader use of SOFR would help make our financial system more resilient.
If there were a large volume of products referencing the compound average rate, there would likely be related demand for futures contracts to hedge those positions, helping to make the forward rate more robust.
It is important that we find ways to make it as easy as possible to use SOFR because the risks to LIBOR are, at this stage, quite considerable.
Even as the ARRC and similar currency groups in other jurisdictions were being formed, the FCA was exerting considerable effort to convince banks to continue submitting to LIBOR.
We have to be aware that two banks left the U.S.
dollar panels despite this encouragement, and that the agreement that the FCA reached with the remaining banks to continue submitting voluntarily through the end of 2021 now has just three-and-a-half years left.
And as Andrew Bailey noted last week, there is also the prospect that LIBOR could be judged to be nonrepresentative under the European Union's Benchmark Regulations, which would severely curtail the liquidity of products referencing LIBOR.
Apart from the questions as to whether LIBOR will continue or whether IBA or the FCA may judge that it is not representative, market participants should consider whether a rate with so few transactions underlying it is really their best option.


Getting It Right: Factors for Tailoring Supervision and Regulation of Large Financial Institutions
But in the time since I became the Vice Chairman for Supervision at the Federal Reserve, we have seen agreement on the final pieces of the international framework for post-crisis regulation--the so-called Basel III endgame.
The Federal Reserve has issued a number of proposed rule changes that would improve our capital and stress testing regime.
And in late May, the Congress enacted the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act (EGRRCPA), which, among other things, directs us to further tailor our supervision and regulation of large banks with more than $100 billion in assets.
The Federal Reserve Board is a firm adherent of the recent legislation's underlying principle that regulation should be tailored to risk.
To an extent, as I will later describe, this principle is already embedded in several aspects of our supervisory framework.
Second, the Federal Reserve will need to revise its framework to allow for a greater differentiation in the supervision and regulation of large firms.
To date, our tailoring of regulations has been based largely‑‑but not exclusively‑‑on asset size, which reflects an unduly one-dimensional approach.
We have been evaluating additional criteria that may provide for greater regulatory differentiation across large banks, and the recent legislation is consistent with the goals of that initiative.
Specifically, the legislation recognizes that large banks have a variety of business models and risk profiles; supervision should be flexible enough to incorporate this heterogeneity.
In my remarks today, I will touch upon some potential factors we have identified for tailoring the supervision and regulation of large banks.
I think everyone in this room would agree that--while there are important ways it can be improved--the body of post-crisis regulation adopted by the Federal Reserve and its fellow banking agencies has, taken as a whole, clearly made the U.S.
In implementing these reforms, the Fed sought to achieve two parallel goals: (1) promoting the safety and soundness of individual banking organizations and (2) enhancing the stability of the broader U.S.
This can be seen in stricter requirements in various elements of the regulatory capital framework that apply only to larger or more complex banks, including certain buffers and surcharges, the application of the supplementary leverage ratio, and the application of the qualitative objections as part of the Board's capital planning framework, among others.
In April, the Board proposed the stress capital buffer, which would simplify its regulatory capital requirements for the largest banks by integrating the stress test results with the Board's non-stress capital requirements.
Further, the Board recognized that the failure of one of the largest banking organizations could create spillovers that would undermine U.S.
To offset this risk, the Board has required these firms to internalize the cost of their potential failure in a tailored manner that corresponds with their importance to the U.S.
These efforts include the Board's capital surcharge for global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) and total loss-absorbing capacity requirements.
In my view, we've made a good start in improving the efficiency of our regulatory regime.
The recent legislation requires us to reevaluate how we regulate banks that have between $100 billion and $250 billion in total assets.
In particular, we need to make a tailoring-related decision in the near term: How will we decide which enhanced prudential standards should apply to which firms with total assets between $100 billion and $250 billion?
In applying enhanced prudential standards for firms with total assets of more than $100 billion, the Congress requires the Board to consider not only size but also capital structure, riskiness, complexity, financial activities, and any other factors the Board deems relevant.
While we use similar factors to calibrate the largest firms' G-SIB surcharges, we have not used them more holistically to tailor the overall supervision and regulation of large banks that do not qualify as G-SIBs.
Further, consistent with the legislation's tailoring requirements, the Board must proactively consider how firms with more than $250 billion in assets that do not qualify as G-SIBs may be more efficiently regulated by applying more tailored standards.
In conjunction with changing regulations, we also need to consider how such changes would be reflected in supervisory programs, guidance, and regulatory reporting.
As supervisors, we need to balance providing appropriate relief to firms with ensuring that firms are maintaining resources and risk‑management practices so they can be resilient under a range of conditions.
I want to spend the balance of my time focusing on the question I previously posed: On what basis will we decide to apply enhanced prudential standards to firms with total assets in the $100-billion to $250-billion range? The recent legislation directs the Board to consider factors other than size for differentiating supervision and regulation of large banking organizations.
We know that the effect of a large bank's failure on the economy is greater than when a smaller bank fails, even though the two banks might be engaged in similar business lines.
In fact, empirical research done at the Federal Reserve shows that stress among larger banks does more significant harm to the economy than stress at smaller banks, even after controlling for the aggregate size of bank failures.2 We also know that larger banks are more operationally complex--even when not engaged in complex business lines--with a broader geographic scope and more layers of management than smaller banks.
Therefore, it seems appropriate to me that a path forward for tailoring supervision and regulation of large banks should not ignore size, but consider it as one factor--although only one factor--along with other factors.
Similarly, financial institutions may be interconnected in many ways, as large banks commonly engage in transactions with other financial institutions that give rise to a wide range of contractual obligations.
Financial distress at a large bank may materially raise the likelihood of distress at other firms given the network of contractual obligations throughout the financial system.
I will highlight a few factors that already reside in various areas of our regulatory framework that I am considering.
This would measure assets and liabilities related to transactions with foreign banks, individuals, and companies, among others.
This factor measures both a firm's complexity and resolvability, as foreign operations add operational complexity in normal times and complicate the ability of the firm to undergo an orderly resolution in times of stress.
Another factor from the G-SIB surcharge framework that could be useful is a firm's use of short-term wholesale funding, which may serve as a proxy for liquidity vulnerability.
Specifically, this can lead to "fire sale" effects that may affect broader financial stability--which occurs when banks that fund long-term or illiquid assets with short-term deposits from financial intermediaries like pension funds and money market mutual funds need to rapidly sell less-liquid assets to maintain their operations.
For example, some nonbank entities engage in complex trading that is not permitted in depository institutions because of their risk.
In addition to thinking about how we will tailor our regulation and supervisory programs for firms with assets between $100 billion and $250 billion, I believe the Board should also review the requirements applicable to the firms with more than $250 billion in total assets but below the G-SIB threshold.
This review should ensure that our regulations continue to appropriately increase in stringency as the risk profiles of firms increase, consistent with our previously stated tailoring goals and the new legislation.
The supervision and regulatory framework for these firms should reflect that there are material differences between those firms that qualify as U.S.
For example, we know that non-G-SIBs with more than $250 billion in assets are generally less complex and less interconnected than U.S.
G-SIBs and thus pose relatively less risk to financial stability.
G-SIBs, on the other hand, have more complex activities, are more interconnected, and pose a far greater risk to financial stability should they fail.
Yet at the moment, many aspects of our regulatory regime treat any bank with more than $250 billion in assets with the same stringency as a G-SIB.
The statute sets an 18-month deadline for this regulatory process, but we can and will move much more rapidly than this.
In terms of capital requirements, both risk-based and leverage capital requirements should remain core components of regulation for large firms with more than $100 billion in total assets.
Stress testing should continue to play an important role in assessing potential losses that large firms would suffer under a severely adverse economic scenario; the recent legislation recognized the importance of stress testing by requiring a supervisory stress test for these large firms.
Therefore, the Board's proposed stress capital buffer, if finalized, would be critical for these firms.
However, we could consider a number of changes for less complex and less interconnected firms related to their capital requirements.
For example, such firms, even if above $250 billion in assets, could have less frequent company-run stress tests.
For those below $250 billion in assets, the statute requires supervisory stress tests to be conducted "periodically", which suggests the legislature wanted us to at least consider a rhythm other than annually.
Additionally, less complex and less interconnected firms could be exempted from requirements to calculate risk-weighted assets under the models-based advanced approaches to capital.
I continue to strongly believe that liquidity regulation should be a primary component of supervision and regulation of large banks.
We all saw the central role that liquidity risk played in the recent financial crisis.
Minimum standardized liquidity measures and internal liquidity stress tests remain critical at firms with more than $100 billion in total assets.
However, for less complex and less interconnected firms with assets greater than $100 billion, there may be opportunities to modify aspects of the standardized liquidity requirements as well as expectations around internal liquidity stress tests and liquidity risk management.
Similarly, banks with more than $250 billion in assets that are not G-SIBs currently face largely the same liquidity regulation as G-SIBs.
As I've said previously, I believe it would make sense to calibrate the liquidity requirements differently for these firms relative to their G-SIB counterparts.
Resolution planning is especially critical to ensure that the largest banking firms structure their operations in ways that make it more possible for them to be resolved upon failure without causing systemic risks for the broader economy.
But most firms with total assets between $100 billion and $250 billion do not pose a high degree of resolvability risk, especially if they are less complex and less interconnected.
Therefore, we should consider scaling back or removing entirely resolution planning requirements for most of the firms in that asset range.
Further, we should consider limiting the scope of application of resolution planning requirements to only the largest, most complex, and most interconnected banking firms because their failure poses the greatest spillover risks to the broader economy.
For firms that would still be subject to resolution planning requirements, we could reduce the frequency and burden of such requirements, perhaps by requiring more-targeted resolution plans.
In conclusion, I believe we have a unique opportunity to further tailor our supervision and regulation framework for large banks in a manner that allows us to be more risk-sensitive while still meeting our core goals of promoting safety and soundness and enhancing financial stability.
The recent legislation requires the Board to tailor its framework of supervision and regulation of large firms in a manner that continues to recognize size as one risk factor, but also more holistically incorporates other risk categories.
Of course, the details of how we implement a tailored framework will be subject to debate, and you can expect the Federal Reserve to be highly engaged in the public feedback process.
Implementing the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act is a high priority for the Board, and we look forward to hearing the range of views as we make progress.
The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Pending research to be published by Federal Reserve Board staff in the near future suggests that an increase in bank stress results in poorer economic performance in a way that scales with bank size.
Put another way, staff estimate that stress at a single bank with $250 billion in deposits would result in roughly an 84 percent decline in quarterly GDP growth, while stress among five banks each with $50 billion in deposits would result in roughly a 24 percent decline in quarterly GDP growth.
Although both scenarios have $250 billion in total failed deposits, the negative impact is greater when the largest bank is stressed.

America's Vital Interest in Global Efforts to Promote Financial Stability
Since the financial crisis, bankers have had to adjust to challenging and evolving economic conditions and to many new regulations.
At times, smaller and regional banks have been left wondering how actions in Washington focused on systemic vulnerabilities and the largest institutions were relevant to how they fund their businesses and in turn finance the aspirations of families, farmers, ranchers, and other entrepreneurs.
I'll start today by trying to address those questions and provide a brief update on steps the Congress and the Federal Reserve are taking related to financial regulation.
I will also briefly describe pending regulatory changes passed last month by Congress, which I believe will further tailor regulations for banks, with particular benefit to community and regional banks.
But I want to devote much of my time today to a broader message about the connection between these improvements in post-crisis regulation and the fundamental purpose of those regulations: to do what must be done to protect our economy from another severe financial crisis.
Banks of all sizes have a shared interest in ensuring that regulation is efficient and appropriately tailored to promote a strong, fair, and competitive market for financial services.
Likewise, banks have a shared interest in ensuring that regulation overall promotes a strong and stable financial system that keeps credit flowing to households and businesses in the communities you serve.
Among the truths revealed by the financial crisis, one of the most important was the recognition that the vulnerabilities that had developed in the financial system were global in nature and that the problems our institutions and markets faced in the United States were inextricably connected to conditions and decisions outside our borders.
Other governments likewise found that problems in the United States spilled over to their financial systems and economies.
To cite just one example, it is well known now that the rapid growth of securitization of residential mortgages in the United States was a prominent factor driving up home lending and driving down lending standards.
I think it is not as well known that a large share of those securities were being created, traded, and held by entities outside the United States.
Some of the most important steps taken since the crisis to make our financial system more resilient have involved collecting information, identifying and monitoring stresses in the global financial system, and establishing and raising international standards.
As I have noted, the improvements the Federal Reserve is making to financial regulation here in America, including tailoring, will help level the playing field for banks and help ensure you are able to continue to compete and serve your customers.
But banks in Utah and elsewhere also benefit from a strong and stable global financial system, and as history has demonstrated, this in turn depends on strong international standards that help level the playing field.
A strong and stable financial system depends also on transparency that helps both the private sector and regulators detect and deter vulnerabilities that could harm the U.S.
So I'd also like to talk to you today about one of the important international bodies created since the crisis to promote global financial stability, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) and tell you why I believe America's active participation in the FSB is important to our nation, and even, as remote as it might seem, relevant to your businesses.
But let me begin with a topic of more immediate interest and offer a brief overview of legislation and regulatory action by the Federal Reserve that I know is important to you and your institutions.
First, a little context: like our economy, the condition of the U.S.
First quarter profits for all banks hit a new record of $56 billion.
Banks are well capitalized and positioned to increase lending to finance investment in a strengthening economy.
According to Federal Reserve data on more than 5,000 community-based holding companies, community banks reported net income of $20.6 billion during 2017, up 4 percent from the year before.
Like larger banks more recently, this result was the product of particularly strong loan activity, with recent year-over-year loan growth of 7.7 percent, which was substantially above the increase last year in the banking industry as a whole.
Turning to recent regulatory developments, the big news, of course, is the Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief and Consumer Protection Act sponsored by Senator Crapo, passed by Congress at the end of May and signed by the President.
Before I get to that, let me briefly mention some things the Federal Reserve and other agencies have done--in some cases presaging steps taken in the new legislation--to reduce the regulatory burden on community and regional banks.
One supervisory improvement is a Federal Reserve program called Bank Exams Tailored to Risk, or the BETR program.
It uses financial metrics to differentiate the level of risk between banks before examinations and assist examiners in tailoring examination procedures to minimize the regulatory burden for firms that engage in low-risk activities, while subjecting higher-risk activities to more testing and review.
Another initiative has been to shift a significant amount of the Federal Reserve's examination activity offsite.
Additionally, the Federal Reserve, along with other agencies, took action to simplify the reporting responsibilities of smaller banks with a new streamlined Call Report form in 2017.
Based on feedback from community banks, we and other regulators also increased the threshold for requiring an appraisal on commercial real estate loans from $250,000 to $500,000.
Looking ahead, the Federal Reserve is developing a revised approach to determining "control" under the Bank Holding Company Act that could help banks raise capital and facilitate nonbank investments.
I will now discuss the new law, which preserves the most important post-crisis reforms for the largest firms while directing the Federal Reserve and other agencies to make numerous changes that should reduce the regulatory burden for community and regional banks.
On the Volcker rule, the legislation calls for exempting the vast majority of banks with $10 billion or less in assets from reporting requirements, which the Federal Reserve supported, due to the lack of trading activity that community banks engage in.
This overtook efforts by the Fed and other regulatory agencies to refine the Volcker rule, but the bottom line is that this broad exemption is law and in the process of being implemented.
Another change in the new legislation raises the asset threshold for bank holding companies eligible for the Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement from $1 billion to $3 billion.
The law also exempts bank holding companies with $50 billion to $100 billion in assets from enhanced prudential standards and exempts banks with less than $100 billion in assets from future stress testing.
The lifting of this threshold importantly allows the Federal Reserve to tailor its rules for these firms moving forward while retaining the ability to protect the safety and soundness of the system.
I mentioned steps related to Call Report streamlining, and the legislation addresses this topic also, allowing reduced Call Report requirements for certain banks with less than $5 billion in assets.
For banks that are well managed and well-capitalized, the asset threshold was raised for a longer, 18-month examination cycle from $1 billion to $3 billion.
Let me now address international efforts to promote financial stability, specifically those centered in the Financial Stability Board.
In the run-up to the crisis, as I'm sure you all know, decades of relative stability in the United States had left both the financial industry and government agencies complacent about potential threats.
And even though financial crises had occurred during that time in some advanced economies, it is fair to say that the United States and other nations did not place a high probability on a crisis that could be global in nature.
As a result, international coordination and collaboration on financial stability was limited, and there was a shortage of detailed and standardized information about financial conditions and vulnerabilities in different countries.
As the crisis descended and the global nature of the problems became clear, the United States and other major economies, working through the Group of Twenty nations, created the Financial Stability Board to coordinate their efforts to stabilize the global financial system, reform international financial regulation, and share information.1 The FSB includes central banks, finance ministries and regulators from 24 nations, the European Union, and also international organizations such as the International Monetary Fund and important global financial standard-setting bodies.
Unlike other global organizations, the FSB includes multiple agencies from each government in recognition of the fact that financial stability is a responsibility shared across many parts of any government.
Treasury Department, and the Securities and Exchange Commission are members.
Some of you may reasonably be wondering, at this point of the speech, how we got from rural appraisals in Utah to the Financial Stability Board in Switzerland.
How are the conditions in 2008 and 2009 that led to creation of the FSB relevant to community banking? Let us remind ourselves how that global financial crisis and ensuing recession looked to communities in Utah and the bankers who serve them.
Community banks, as we all know, engaged in little of the risky activity that was the basis of the crisis.
But few community banks, I think, were unaffected by the competitive forces that were unleashed in the years leading up to 2008.
When short-term wholesale funding froze up, and securitizing loans became impossible, and Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac effectively failed, community banks were affected.
And when your customers were hit hard by the crisis, community banks were affected too.
In two years, from 2007 to 2009, the unemployment rate in Utah more than tripled.
As it usually does, Utah weathered the Great Recession better than most places, but it was still the toughest economic times our state has faced in many decades, and of course, this profoundly affected banks and their customers.
While that was occurring, the Federal Reserve and governments in other countries affected by the crisis were tackling several challenges in trying to strengthen financial regulation and oversight.
agencies had some tools to help assess prudential risks for U.S.-based firms when the crisis hit.
Information sharing about systemic financial vulnerabilities was more limited, particularly for conditions outside the United States.
We also failed to appreciate the ways in which the shadow banking system that had grown up outside the institutions we oversaw had become interconnected with those institutions.
The existing global forums for discussion of these issues were considered less important or were focused on just one financial sector, and membership was often limited to a handful of industrial countries.
We now understand the importance of taking a global view on financial vulnerabilities, and we are learning from each other about how to fill the gaps in understanding and data that exist.
An additional challenge that the United States faced, in responding to the crisis and establishing more effective oversight and higher standards was the inability to enforce such rules in a global financial system without common, more uniform standards.
If some of the activities threatening financial stability occurred outside the United States and in jurisdictions with lower standards, raising standards in the United States would be both ineffective in fully stabilizing the financial system, and could put U.S.
firms at a competitive disadvantage, which would be only an added disincentive to embrace effective standards.
Every nation, of course, seeking to make its financial system more resilient faced these same challenges and disincentives, an example of the problem of collective action that points nations toward international cooperation.
I can attest to the FSB's improvement over the pre-crisis discussions that took place internationally because during the first Bush Administration I was a delegate to the informal and more limited group that preceded the FSB.
An important part of the FSB's work is to endorse minimum standards in different areas; for example, identifying the key attributes of effective resolution planning for systemically important firms.
Are they doing what we intended them to do? Have there been unintended consequences? Can we make the reforms more efficient; that is can we achieve the same effects while lowering the burden on institutions and supervisors?
Once again, you might be wondering why something like resolution regime-planning should matter to community bankers.
You might be hoping that I get back to the good news I delivered earlier, about steps being taken in Washington to tailor regulation and reduce the regulatory burden on community banks.
Appropriately reducing the regulatory burden for community banks is possible when we can get an accurate picture of the risks and vulnerabilities in the broader financial system, which Utah's banks are part of and depend on.
Tailoring does not mean abandoning our responsibility to promote a stable financial system, but embracing it, assisted by FSB efforts to ensure that reforms are having the intended effects and supported by the global standards that the FSB and other international standard-setting bodies are able to establish and promote.
In closing, I want to address an issue relevant to any international organization, which is sovereignty.
More specifically, we sometimes hear concerns that international bodies such as the FSB threaten our sovereignty by imposing rules on the United States, which would be a concern.
Let me be clear: the FSB has no enforcement powers, no legal authority to command its members to do anything, and not even authority, as in some international organizations, to induce action based on contractual obligations.
The FSB does not impose obligations, it addresses problems--problems that are of great importance to the United States and which, because of the global nature of the financial system, we cannot address alone.
The United States and other governments created the FSB and participate in it because it is in our national interests to do so, and that is really the basis of its effectiveness.
The United States is not weaker or less independent by participating in the FSB or other standard-setting bodies.
On the contrary, when rightly structured our participation in these groups makes our financial system significantly stronger by ensuring that the U.S.
Our consumers and businesses are more secure and prosperous because the FSB helps make sure that all countries are doing their share in promoting financial stability and not gaining an unfair advantage.
That can make reaching decisions more difficult, but it also yields decisions that can be truly effective solutions because all participants feel a stake in them.
It is useful when the credibility and commitment of the decisions are especially important, such as when my Fed colleagues and I set monetary policy.
At the FSB, relying on consensus helps 68 agencies and other members from two dozen countries with different perspectives and agendas come together around our shared interest in a stable global financial system.
International negotiations and standard-setting is not the best approach to all problems, but in my past experience as a Treasury Department official, it is often the best way to tackle problems that are global in scope.
By actively participating in the FSB and engaging with its members at a high level, the United States is supporting high international standards that are equal to those in the United States.
The FSB was created in April 2009 and was the successor of a less-formal group known as the Financial Stability Forum.

Monetary Policy at a Time of Uncertainty and Tight Labor Markets
At "Price and Wage-Setting in Advanced Economies," an ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal
Nine years into an expansion that has sometimes proceeded slowly, the U.S.
Growth is meaningfully above most estimates of its long-term trend--though admittedly, that trend is not as strong as we would like it to be.
The labor market is particularly robust, with unemployment at its lowest level since April 2000.
Inflation has moved up close to our 2 percent objective, although we have yet to see it remain near that objective on a sustained basis.
High demand for workers should support wage growth and labor force participation--the latter a measure on which the United States now lags most other advanced economies.1 A tight labor market may also lead businesses to invest more in technology and training, which should support productivity growth.
And groups such as some racial and ethnic minorities that still have higher unemployment and lower participation rates could see increasing benefits from a tight labor market.2 In short, there is a lot to like about low unemployment.
Achieving our statutory goal of maximum employment in a context of price stability and financial stability is both our responsibility and our challenge.
Earlier in the expansion, as the economy recovered, the need for highly accommodative monetary policy was clear.
But with unemployment low and expected to decline further, inflation close to our objective, and the risks to the outlook roughly balanced, the case for continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate is strong.
At 3.8 percent, the unemployment rate is below most estimates of its long-run level, which are now clustered in the mid-4s.
Many other labor market indicators also suggest an economy near full employment.
To name just a few, these indicators include an elevated level of job vacancies.
For the first time since the Labor Department began collecting the data in 2000, there are now more job vacancies than there are people counted as unemployed.
In addition, the rate at which workers are quitting their jobs is elevated, a sign that workers are able to find another job when they seek one.
The labor force participation rate of prime-age workers has moved up in recent years but remains below pre-crisis levels.3 In addition, wage growth has been moderate, consistent with low productivity growth but also an indication that the labor market is not excessively tight.
Looking ahead, the job market is likely to strengthen further.
Real gross domestic product in the United States is now reported to have risen 2-3/4 percent over the past four quarters, well above most estimates of its long-run trend.
Expansionary fiscal policy is expected to add to aggregate demand over the next few years.
Many forecasters expect the unemployment rate to fall into the mid-3s and to remain there for an extended period.
If that comes to pass, it will mean the lowest unemployment in the United States since the late 1960s.
Because we have so little experience with very low unemployment, it is interesting to compare today's labor market with that earlier period.
Unemployment was below 4 percent from February 1966 through January 1970.
During that time, inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures increased from below 2 percent in 1965 to about 5 percent in 1970.
In hindsight, unemployment is now widely thought to have been unsustainably low at that time and to have contributed to escalating inflation.
But how significant is this precedent for today? The U.S.
economy has changed in many ways over the past 50 years.
By some estimates, the natural rate of unemployment is substantially lower now.4 For example, the Congressional Budget Office now estimates that the natural rate was about 5‑3/4 percent (and rising) in the late 1960s, compared with 4-3/4 percent at present.5
Rising education levels do point to a decline in the natural rate since the 1960s, because more highly educated people are less likely to be unemployed.
The share of the population with a college degree has risen from less than 15 percent in the late 1960s to nearly 40 percent now, and the share with less than a high school degree has declined from 45 percent to about 5 percent.6 Another important difference from the 1960s is that inflation has been low and stable for an extended period, which has better anchored inflation expectations.
Today policymakers have a greater appreciation of the role expectations play in inflation dynamics and a clearer commitment to maintaining low and stable inflation.
Unfortunately, with the passage of a half-century and important changes in the structure of our economy and in central bank practices, in my view the historical comparison does not shed as much light as we might have hoped.
The lack of useful historical precedent leaves us with some uncertainty about the answers to several important and challenging questions.
First, estimates of the natural rate of unemployment by Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants and others have drifted lower as unemployment has declined without much apparent reaction from inflation.
How reliable are these estimates? Natural rate estimates have always been uncertain, and may be even more so now as inflation has become less responsive to the unemployment rate.7 The anchoring of expectations is a welcome development and has likely played a role in flattening the Phillips curve.
But a flatter Phillips curve makes it harder to assess whether movements in inflation reflect the cyclical position of the economy or other influences.
Second, what would be the consequences for inflation if unemployment were to run well below the natural rate for an extended period? The flat Phillips curve suggests that the implications for inflation might not be large, although a very tight labor market could lead to larger, nonlinear effects.
Research on this question is ambiguous, again reflecting the limited historical experience.8 We should also remember that where inflation expectations are well anchored, it is likely because central banks have kept inflation under control.
If central banks were instead to try to exploit the nonresponsiveness of inflation to low unemployment and push resource utilization significantly and persistently past sustainable levels, the public might begin to question our commitment to low inflation, and expectations could come under upward pressure.
If anything, some measures of longer-term inflation expectations in the United States have edged lower in recent years.
Third, can persistently strong economic conditions pose financial stability risks? Of course, strong economic conditions are a good thing! Such conditions can make the financial system better able to absorb shocks through strong balance sheets and investor confidence.
But we have often seen confidence become overconfidence and lead to excessive borrowing and risk-taking, leaving the financial system more vulnerable.
financial stability vulnerabilities as moderate and broadly in line with their long-run averages.
While some asset prices are high by historical standards, I do not see broad signs of excessive borrowing or leverage.
In addition, banks have far greater levels of capital and liquidity than before the crisis.
Fourth, while persistently strong economic conditions can pose risks to inflation and perhaps financial stability, we can also ask whether there may be lasting benefits.
As I mentioned, a tight labor market could draw more people into the labor force.
In fact, as the labor market has tightened, more workers have been moving back to work and off disability rolls.9 There could also be benefits to productivity and potential growth.
As is often the case, in the current environment, significant uncertainty attends the process of making monetary policy.
Today, with the economy strong and risks to the outlook balanced, the case for continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate remains strong and broadly supported among FOMC participants.
See Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (2018), Economic Survey of the United States 2018 (Paris: OECD).
These groups tend to both suffer most from labor market downturns and benefit most from improving labor markets.
The labor force participation rate is defined as the number of people either with a job or who have actively looked for work within the past four weeks, as a share of the total population.
The natural rate of unemployment is the unemployment rate over the longer term that is consistent with low and stable inflation.
It comprises both the "frictional" unemployment of people who are temporarily between jobs or searching as they have reentered the labor force and the more "structural" unemployment of people whose skills or physical location are not a good match for the jobs available.
Yellen (2017), "The Goals of Monetary Policy and How We Pursue Them," speech delivered at the Commonwealth Club, San Francisco, January 18.
Contemporaneous estimates of the natural rate (or "full employment") from the late 1960s were lower than current estimates for that period.
For example, the Economic Report of the President from 1968 defined potential output as occurring when the unemployment rate is 4 percent.
See Executive Office of the President of the United States (1968), Economic Report of the President (PDF) (Washington: U.S.
Other changes in the workforce since the late 1960s seem less likely to have much affected the natural rate of unemployment.
There are many more women in the workforce now, but while women used to have higher unemployment rates than men, that is no longer the case.
And while younger workers tend to have less stable employment patterns and higher unemployment rates than older workers, the working population is, on net, only a little bit older now than it was in the late 1960s.
(The average age of people in the workforce declined through the 1970s as more of the baby-boom generation entered their working years, but it increased subsequently.) Return to text
For evidence on the changing effects of labor market utilization on inflation, internationally as well as in the United States, see Olivier Blanchard, Eugenio Cerutti, and Lawrence Summers (2015), "Inflation and Activity--Two Explorations and Their Monetary Policy Implications (PDF)," in Inflation and Unemployment in Europe, proceedings of the 2015 ECB Forum on Central Banking (Sintra, Portugal: European Central Bank), pp.
Watson (1997), "How Precise Are Estimates of the Natural Rate of Unemployment?" in Christina D.
Detmeister (2017), "Nonlinearities in the Phillips Curve for the United States: Evidence Using Metropolitan Data," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-070 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June), http://dx.doi.org/10.17016/FEDS.2017.070.
See Ernie Tedeschi (2018), "Will Employment Keep Growing? Disabled Workers Offer a Clue," The Upshot, New York Times, March 15.

I appreciate the opportunity to join the Forecasters Club to discuss the path ahead for our economy and monetary policy.1 In the months ahead, I expect to see tightening resource utilization in the U.S.
Continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate are likely to be consistent with sustaining strong labor market conditions and inflation around target, with the balance sheet running off gradually and predictably in the background.
This outlook suggests a policy path that moves gradually from modestly accommodative today to neutral--and, after some time, modestly beyond neutral--against the backdrop of a longer-run neutral rate that is likely to remain low by historical standards.
Although indicators of economic activity were on the soft side earlier in the year, the outlook for the remainder of 2018 remains quite positive, supported by sizable fiscal stimulus as well as still-accommodative financial conditions.
In the latest report, real gross domestic product (GDP) increased 2.2 percent at an annual rate in the first quarter of 2018, a slowdown from the 3 percent pace in the final three quarters of 2017.
By contrast, business fixed investment increased 9 percent at an annual rate last quarter, surpassing its robust 2017 pace.
I expect real GDP growth to pick up in the next few quarters.
In particular, the fundamentals for consumer spending are favorable: Income gains have been strong, consumer confidence remains solid, and employment prospects remain bright.
Moreover, the sizable fiscal stimulus that is in train is likely to provide a tailwind to growth in the second half of the year and beyond.2 From a position of full employment, the economy will likely receive a substantial boost from $1.5 trillion in personal and corporate tax cuts and a $300 billion increase in federal spending, with estimates suggesting a boost to the growth rate of real GDP of about 3/4 percent this year and next.3
In short, with a tightening labor market and inflation near target, fiscal stimulus in the pipeline suggests some risk to the upside.
By contrast, recent developments abroad suggest some risk to the downside.
Global growth has been synchronized over the past year, but recent developments pose some risk.
With some uptick in political uncertainty, and inflation still below target in the euro area and Japan, monetary policies among the advanced economies look likely to be divergent for some time.
An environment with a strengthening dollar, rising energy prices, and the possibility of rising rates raises the risks of capital flow reversals in some emerging markets that have seen increased borrowing from abroad.
Although stresses have been contained to a few vulnerable countries so far, the risk of a broader pullback bears watching.
Indeed, the unemployment rate moved down to 3.9 percent in April following six consecutive months at 4.1 percent.
The unemployment rate for African Americans dropped in April to 6.6 percent, which is the lowest level recorded since this series began in 1972 but still high relative to other groups.
April's 3.9 percent unemployment rate was the lowest reading since December 2000.
If the unemployment rate falls another couple of tenths--which seems likely, based on recent trends--it will be at its lowest level since 1969.
Although the late 1960s marked the beginning of what is now called the Great Inflation, it is worth keeping in mind that there have been important shifts in the labor market since that time.
For example, educational attainment is much higher today than it was in the 1960s, and college degree holders tend to have much lower unemployment rates, on average, than those with a high school degree or less.4
While the unemployment rate is now lower than before the financial crisis, the employment-to-population ratio for prime-age workers remains about 1 percentage point below its pre-crisis level.
It is an open question what portion of the prime-age Americans who are out of the labor force may prove responsive to tight labor market conditions.
While it is difficult to know with precision how much slack still remains, I am seeing more evidence that labor markets are tightening, and wages are accelerating, although at a measured pace.
The 12-month change in the employment cost index (ECI) for private industry workers in the first quarter was 2.8 percent, up from 2.3 percent in the year-earlier period.
By way of comparison, in the period from 2005 to 2007, just before the financial crisis, the ECI rose a bit more than 3 percent at an annual rate, while core personal consumption expenditures (PCE) inflation was around 2-1/4 percent.
I am hearing anecdotes of labor market shortages in particular occupations and sectors, echoing a theme in our recent Beige Book.
Going forward, I will be looking for confirmation in other measures of wages that labor market tightness is feeding through to wage gains.
While the recent core PCE data are somewhat encouraging, we will want to see inflation coming in around target on a sustained basis after seven years of below-target readings.
As I have noted before, the persistence of subdued inflation, despite an unemployment rate that has moved below most estimates of its natural rate, suggests some risk that underlying inflation--the slow-moving trend that exerts a pull on wage and price setting--may have softened.5 For example, some survey measures of longer-run inflation expectations are currently lower than they were before the financial crisis, as are most estimates based on statistical filters.
Inflation compensation has moved up recently but is still running somewhat below levels that prevailed before the crisis.
Re-anchoring underlying inflation at the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent objective is an important goal.
Recent research has highlighted the downside risks to inflation and inflation expectations that are posed by the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates, and it underscores the importance of ensuring underlying inflation does not slip below target in today's new normal.6 In that regard, if we were to see a mild, temporary overshoot of the inflation target, this could well be consistent with the symmetry of the FOMC's target and may help nudge underlying inflation back to target.7
In short, it is reassuring to see core PCE inflation moving up, along with market-based measures of inflation compensation retracing earlier declines.
After seven years of below-target inflation, it will be important to see inflation coming in around target on a sustained basis to be confident that underlying trend inflation is running at 2 percent.
Even though longer-term Treasury yields have moved up, on net, since the beginning of the year, there has been growing attention of late to the possibility of an inversion of the yield curve--that is, circumstances in which short-term interest rates exceed long-term interest rates on Treasury securities.
Historically, yield curve inversions have had a reliable track record of predicting recessions in the United States.8 Since 1960, there has only been one case where the 3-month Treasury yield has moved above the 10-year Treasury yield and a recession has not followed--in 1966.9
When the FOMC is undertaking a deliberate tightening in policy, short-term interest rates typically rise, as do expectations of short-term interest rates in the medium term, while interest rates in the distant future may be less affected.
For example, if short-term interest rates were raised to stabilize temporary swings in the economy, the logic of the expectations hypothesis would suggest that long rates would not rise as much.
And if tighter monetary policy were to weaken the economy with a lag, this would lead to long rates not rising by as much or at all.
If market participants become concerned about a future macroeconomic risk that could lead to a weaker economy, this concern would tend to lower expected longer-term interest rates, both because monetary policy would be expected to become more accommodative in the future and because market participants may increase their relative holdings of safe assets, such as Treasury securities.
In this case, longer-dated Treasury yields may fall, and if short-term interest rates do not adjust commensurately, the yield curve will invert ahead of a weaker economy.
As we try to assess the implications of this flattening of the yield curve, it is important to take into account the very low level of the current 10-year yield by historical standards.
One reason the 10-year Treasury yield may be unusually low is that market expectations of interest rates in the longer run may be unusually low.
According to one estimate from Federal Reserve Board staff, the term premium has tended to be slightly negative in recent years.
With a very low term premium, any given amount of monetary policy tightening will lead to an inversion sooner so that even a modest tightening that might not have led to an inversion in the past could do so today.
There are a number of possible explanations of the low level of the term premium.
The asset purchases of the Federal Reserve and other central banks may be contributing factors.
The goal of these policies was to lower longer-term interest rates--and in many cases, expressly by lowering term premiums.
A second reason the term premium may be lower than in the past is the changing correlation between stock and bond returns, likely caused by changes in expected inflation outcomes.12 While in the 1970s and 1980s stock and bond returns tended to be positively correlated, more recently the correlation has tended to be negative.
This changed correlation between stock and bond returns in turn may be related to better anchored inflation expectations following a long period of low and stable inflation.
On the one hand, a continued gradual runoff of the balance sheet of the Federal Reserve and reduced bond buying by other central banks will tend to put upward pressure on the term premium.
On the other hand, the FOMC's demonstrated commitment to maintaining low and stable inflation makes it unlikely that expectations of high inflation will reemerge.
Thus, on balance, while term premiums may recover somewhat from their recent depressed values, it is unlikely they will return to the high levels of earlier decades.
In the median outlook in the FOMC's Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the federal funds rate is projected to reach its longer-run value by 2019 and exceed it in 2020.
It is important to emphasize that the flattening yield curve suggested by the SEP median is associated with a policy path calibrated to sustain full employment and inflation around target.
So while I will keep a close watch on the yield curve as an important signal on how tight financial conditions are becoming, I consider it as just one among several important indicators.
As suggested by the SEP median path, I believe that the forward-guidance language in the Committee statement that was introduced a few years ago that "the federal funds rate is likely to remain, for some time, below levels that are expected to prevail in the longer run" is growing stale and may no longer serve its original purpose.
For purposes of comparison, in March 2016, the median of SEP projections for the federal funds rate path had the funds rate rising to 3.0 percent and remaining below the longer run value that was projected to be 3.3 percent.
A year later, the median projection of the longer-run federal funds rate fell.
In the March 2018 SEP, the median projection of the federal funds rate peaks at 3.4 percent in 2020--1/2 percentage point above the median projection of its longer-run value of 2.9 percent.
It is worth noting that this progression reflects a decrease in the long-run federal funds rate as much as an increase in the medium-run federal funds rate.
In an environment of tightening resource utilization and above-trend growth, with sizable fiscal stimulus likely to provide a boost to demand in the near-to-medium term that should fade somewhat further out, it seems likely that the neutral rate could rise in the medium term above its longer-run value.
I expect current tailwinds to boost the neutral rate gradually over the medium term but leave little imprint on the long-run neutral rate.
The short-run level of the neutral rate should rise gradually because the forces that are moving the economy from headwinds to tailwinds are likely to play out gradually.
A gradual pace is also warranted in light of the long period of undershooting the inflation target.
I would not underestimate the challenge of calibrating monetary policy to sustain full employment and re-anchor trend inflation around 2 percent, while adjusting to sizable stimulus at a time when resource constraints are tightening and the economy is growing above trend.
I continue to view gradual increases in the federal funds rate as the appropriate path, although I will remain vigilant for the emergence of risks and prepared to adjust if conditions change.
"Economic Forecasts with the Yield Curve," FRBSF Economic Letter 2018-07.
"Federal Open Market Committee Reaffirms Its 'Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,' " press release, January 31.
"Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1.
"The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, September 12.
"Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5.
"Navigating Monetary Policy as Headwinds Shift to Tailwinds," speech delivered to the Money Marketeers of New York University, New York, March 6.
"Has the Inflation Risk Premium Fallen? Is It Now Negative?" FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 4.
"The Predictive Power of the Term Structure of Interest Rates in Europe and the United States: Implications for the European Central Bank," European Economic Review, vol.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 8.
World Economic Outlook Update: Brighter Prospects, Optimistic Markets, Challenges Ahead.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March 1.
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September (revised December 2011).
"Term Structure Modeling with Supply Factors and the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programs (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"The Risk-Adjusted Monetary Policy Rule," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-061.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
For example, the International Monetary Fund (2018) estimates that the tax cut legislation will raise the level of U.S.
13) estimates that increased spending caps will boost the level of real GDP by 0.6 percent in 2019.
The share of the labor force aged 25 or older with a college degree or more is around 40 percent today, compared with 15 percent in the late 1960s, and the share with less than a high school degree has fallen from around 40 percent to around 7 percent today.
The unemployment rates of college-educated adults are typically much lower--around 2 percent today--compared with high school noncompleters--currently around 6 percent.
Johansson and Meldrum (2018) and Favara and others (2016), however, argue that adding information about bond risk premiums reduces somewhat the predictive power of the yield spread.
While that statement is true looking at monthly average interest rates, there were several days in mid-1989 when the 3-month Treasury yield was higher than the 10-year yield.

At "350 years of Central Banking: The Past, the Present and the Future," A Sveriges Riksbank anniversary conference sponsored by the Riksbank and the Riksdag, Stockholm, Sweden
Thank you for inviting me here to celebrate this important milestone.
Today is a special day for all of us, since the founding of the Riksbank 350 years ago marked the beginning of central banking.1 As we meet to discuss the challenges and opportunities the future may hold, it is worth pausing to note that the three and a half centuries since the Riksbank's founding have seen economic growth and dynamism the breadth and duration of which have been unprecedented in world history.
In my comments today, I will explore the road ahead for public transparency and accountability of central banks in a time of intense scrutiny and declining trust in public institutions in many places around the world.
As you know, the importance of transparency and accountability to monetary policymaking was recognized and became firmly entrenched in practice over the past few decades.
Today I will focus on the less-often emphasized but critically important role transparency and accountability play in regulatory and financial stability policies.
To preview my conclusions, public transparency and accountability around both financial stability and monetary policy have become all the more important in light of the extraordinary actions taken by central banks in response to the Global Financial Crisis.
Financial stability policymaking has evolved from managing individual crises as they arise to establishing a policy framework that emphasizes prevention.
This framework now includes measures to increase the resiliency of the financial system; enhanced monitoring of financial institutions and of building risks to the system; and measures, such as resolution planning, that require firms to take steps today to better prepare for future episodes of stress.
The framework is still evolving, and we will need to be open to making changes and to new ways to enhance transparency and accountability.
Opinion polls show that trust in government and public institutions is at historic lows.2 In this environment, central banks cannot take our measure of independence for granted.
For monetary policy, the case for central bank independence rests on the demonstrated benefits of insulating monetary policy decisions from shorter-term political considerations.
But for a quarter century, inflation has been low and inflation expectations anchored.
We must not forget the lessons of the past, when a lack of central bank independence led to episodes of runaway inflation and subsequent economic contractions.
The crisis and its aftermath led central banks to take extraordinary actions, actions that challenged the ingenuity of experts in the field and were understandably difficult to explain and justify to a skeptical public.
For monetary policy, the Fed's mandate is to keep inflation low and stable and to achieve maximum employment.
I view this responsibility as being highly complementary to other aspects of our mission: Financial stability promotes sustainable economic growth, and a stable, well-functioning financial system is an effective transmission channel for monetary policy.
Indeed, there can be no macroeconomic stability without financial stability.
Within our narrow mandates, to safeguard against political interference, central banks are afforded instrument independence‑‑that is, we are given considerable freedom to choose the means to achieve legislatively-assigned goals.
While the focus is often on monetary policy independence, research suggests that a degree of independence in regulatory and financial stability matters improves the stability of the banking system and leads to better outcomes.3 For this reason, governments in many countries, including the United States, have granted some institutional and budgetary independence to their financial regulators.
In turn, transparency provides an essential basis for accountability and democratic legitimacy by enabling effective legislative oversight and keeping the public informed.4 Of course, central banks also need to stick closely to our mandates; the case for independence weakens to the extent that central banks stray into issues that the legislature has not assigned to us.5
There is also an important policy effectiveness argument in favor of transparency.
In the financial stability arena, there is no better example of this than the role that the first round of stress tests played during the crisis in restoring confidence in the U.S.
banking system.6 So in the financial stability realm, the case for enhanced transparency is not just about being accountable; it is also about providing credible information that can help restore and sustain public confidence in the financial system.
The post-crisis regulatory system recognizes the importance of enhanced transparency, both about financial institutions themselves and about the processes and expectations of regulators and supervisors.
Before the crisis, supervision focused on the safety and soundness of individual institutions and was insufficiently attentive to risk in the financial system as a whole.
Supervisory judgments about firms were shared with the public only in rare and exceptional circumstances.
Financial stability tools were deployed after the fact, to address specific events that emerged to threaten stability.
It is an understatement to say that this approach proved inadequate in the crisis.
The post-crisis regime has shifted to implementing preventive policies well in advance of any crisis.7 Newly established ex ante policies include building the resilience of institutions by requiring more and higher-quality capital and liquidity buffers; a regime of stress tests undertaken by supervisors; and resolution planning, which requires firms to analyze their own potential for distress or failure and create a plan to be used in the event of bankruptcy.
In a sense, stress testing is itself a step forward in transparency.
Pre-crisis, supervisors' views of the risks facing our most systemically important firms--and the firms' ability to understand and survive these risks--were shrouded in secrecy.
Post-crisis, as part of our stress-testing regime, these supervisory views and expectations are transparent.
We expect that these firms will have capital, liquidity, and risk-management capabilities that are adequate for the firms not only to survive, but to continue to perform their key functions even in the event of truly severe stress, akin to the global financial crisis.
We make a great deal of information regarding the stress tests public, including the scenarios we use, portfolio-level projected losses for participating firms, and, of course, the results.
We have also proposed for public comment a range of ways to further enhance the transparency of the supervisory stress tests.
This detailed disclosure provides the public with a wealth of information on how these institutions would perform under severe stress.
At the Federal Reserve we use a variety of additional means to enhance public understanding of our supervisory and financial stability efforts and judgments.
The Board staff's assessment of financial stability is discussed four times a year at Federal Open Market Committee meetings, and these discussions are summarized in the meeting's published minutes.
And, since 2013, the semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress has contained a review of financial stability conditions.
Some of these new policies, such as stress testing and resolution planning, are inherently complex and challenging for all involved.
As a result, transparency and accountability around financial stability tools present particular challenges.
We will continue to strive to find better ways to enhance transparency around our approach to preserving financial stability.
There is every reason to expect that technology and communications will continue to rapidly evolve, and to affect the financial system and financial stability in ways that we cannot fully anticipate.
While future innovations may well improve the delivery of financial services and make the system stronger, they may also contain the seeds of potential future systemic vulnerabilities.
We will need to keep up with the pace of innovation, which will doubtless require changes to our approach to financial stability.
As we consider such changes, it will remain critically important to provide transparency and accountability.
By doing so, we strengthen the foundation of democratic legitimacy that enables central banks to serve the needs of our citizens, in the long and proud tradition of the Riksbank.
"Stress Testing Banks: What Have We Learned?" speech delivered at "Maintaining Financial Stability: Holding a Tiger by the Tail," a financial markets conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, held in Stone Mountain, Ga., April 8.
"Monetary Policy in a New Era," paper presented at "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute, Washington, October 2.
Independence of Federal Financial Regulators: Structure, Funding, and Other Issues, Congressional Research Service Report 7-5700.
"Transparency of Central Banks' Policies," in Peter Conti-Brown and Rosa Maria Lastra, eds., Research Handbook on Central Banking.
"What Is Macroprudential Policy for? Making It Safe for Central Bankers (PDF)," speech delivered at "Financial Systems and the Real Economy," a conference sponsored by Bank Negara Malaysia and the Bank for International Settlements, held in Kuala Lumpur, March 31.
Also, the need for some regulatory independence is not exclusive to the central bank; see Bernanke (2017) for a discussion.

Keeping Community at the Heart of the Community Reinvestment Act
At the Association of Neighborhood and Housing Development Eighth Annual Community Development Conference Build.Community.Power, New York, New York
Here, as elsewhere in the country, there remain important gaps in economic opportunity.
Powerful research now demonstrates that persistent gaps in economic opportunity are connected to the health of neighborhoods.
As I have noted previously, these disparities matter for growth and prosperity.
If there are large disparities in opportunity, such that enterprise, exertion, and investments reap lower returns in some communities than others, then families and small businesses in these communities will invest less in the future, and potential growth will fall short.4 Although there are important implications at the national level for growth and prosperity, to the extent that the roots of the disparities in opportunity and mobility lie in local communities, an important part of the solution is likely to be investments in those communities.5
That one powerful insight--the importance of investment in communities--lies at the heart of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA).
Implementing this law effectively is one of the important responsibilities of the banking agencies in promoting strong outcomes locally that reverberate nationally.
So let me turn to the role of the CRA in supporting local efforts to strengthen low- and moderate-income neighborhoods and offer my preliminary thoughts on the opportunity before us to make the regulations even more effective in this regard.
Federal lending agencies used these redlined maps in deciding where to guarantee mortgage loans.6 Not surprisingly, the resulting deprivation of credit stifled opportunity for the people living in these areas.
Through the CRA, Congress requires the federal banking agencies to encourage banks and thrifts to help meet the credit needs of the communities they are chartered to serve, including low- and moderate-income neighborhoods, consistent with safety and soundness.
It requires the Federal Reserve and other agencies to evaluate how well banking institutions help meet those needs and to assign ratings to their performance.7 The CRA further requires the agencies to make public both the ratings and their written evaluations of the banks' performance.
This transparency provides an incentive for banks to work with their communities to meet the needs of low- and moderate-income members and provides important information to enable community members to engage meaningfully with banks.
Research has demonstrated that the CRA has had a positive effect on low- and moderate- income neighborhoods.8 The CRA is unique in that it puts decisionmaking about the community's needs and priorities in the hands of local stakeholders: financial institutions that lend and invest, community organizations that deliver services and develop real estate, and state and local governments that direct incentives and subsidies.
Much has changed in the years since the CRA was enacted, including technology-driven changes in the delivery of financial services, and it is high time to consider corresponding improvements to the regulations.
Both banks and community organizations have offered a variety of suggestions for improving the CRA regulations and their implementation in the last several years.
We are undertaking discussions with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, with which we have traditionally issued joint rulemakings on the CRA.
The Federal Reserve has long been interested in engaging in an interagency review of the CRA regulations, so we are pleased to participate in this process.
CRA is a vital tool to address the credit needs of low- and moderate-income communities, and I believe the time is ripe for a refresh to make it even more relevant to today's challenges.
This is the most important aspect of refreshing the CRA, and also the one that will require the most care.
As our Federal Advisory Council noted, "...a bank's ability to engage in meaningful community development efforts continues to require a meaningful knowledge of and presence in local communities."9 A significant strength of CRA evaluations is that a bank's performance is evaluated taking into account the demographics of its communities, the types of housing and businesses they serve, and the other financial institutions serving those communities.
The current regulations use branches and deposit-taking ATMs as a proxy for the communities the bank serves because these were the primary mechanisms for delivering services when the CRA was enacted and for many years subsequently.
Today, changes in technology and consumer preferences have made it possible for banks to serve customers far beyond their physical branches and deposit-taking ATMs--via online and mobile platforms.
For large parts of the country, branches and deposit-taking ATMs remain an important way that banks engage with a community.
As our Community Advisory Council recently emphasized, "[f]or many rural and LMI populations, bank branches remain critical for the provision of bank loans, investments, and services."10
Recent studies measuring the impact of branch closures on credit availability in neighborhoods demonstrate that branches still matter, particularly with respect to accessing small business credit.11 The Federal Reserve Bank of New York found that access to small business credit declines and the rates for small business loans increase as the distance between the bank and the borrower grows.12 Similarly, the large majority of mortgage lending continues to be located in one or more of a bank's delineated assessment areas--that is, near a physical branch.
Banks vary widely in terms of the types of services they offer and the mechanisms they use for reaching their customers.
On one end of the spectrum, many community banks still rely primarily on branches and ATMs to reach their customers, with mobile functionality offered primarily to enhance the customer experience.
At the other end of the spectrum, online banks employ business models that reach customers across much or all of America without relying on branches.
Although these online banks may provide the same retail products and services as a traditional bank with a branch network, because they have only one location, they are evaluated for CRA purposes in the area around that location, rather than in the many areas where they have customers.
Still other banks offer a limited set of credit products or wholesale services.
ILCs are owned by corporations rather than bank holding companies and are typically chartered to provide credit cards or other forms of financing related to their parent company's business.
The result is a saturated market for community development lending and investment in Salt Lake City.
At the same time, other areas in Utah and beyond have important community development opportunities that may go unmet.
At a minimum, revised CRA regulations should allow banks with this type of business model to expand CRA activities beyond the area surrounding its branch so that the community and economic development needs of more underserved communities can be met.
Branches are important vehicles for reaching small business customers and low-income consumers, but they are not the only way.
In considering ways to revise the CRA regulations, the agencies should be thoughtful about how to make the areas in which we evaluate CRA performance more meaningful to both banks and low- and moderate-income communities.
For community banks that rely on branches to serve their customers, the current assessment area approach may need only small adjustments.
For banks that serve their customers through a variety of approaches, assessing their broader deposit-taking and loan-making footprint might make sense.
To the extent that banks are able to serve the needs in low- and moderate-income communities through additional channels, it is important they receive due consideration, while CRA revisions should also continue to recognize the importance of sustaining branches in communities where they are needed.
The second, and related, principle guiding our CRA refresh is that the regulations should encourage banks to seek out opportunities in underserved areas.
As I noted earlier, the CRA recognizes that banks make a unique contribution.
Banks are able to make targeted and valuable investments because of their stake in the local community and their knowledge of it.
As a long-term stakeholder in a community, a bank's efforts to finance housing, small businesses, and community services are not just good business short-term, but also good investments long-term as residents improve their economic standing and use more banking services.
Streamlining the CRA regulations and clarifying the performance measures could create stronger incentives for banks to pursue the less obvious, but potentially more impactful, projects that low- and moderate-income neighborhoods need the most to become areas of opportunity.
We will want to update the CRA in ways that reduce the distortions that lead to some areas becoming credit "hot spots" and others credit deserts.
Where there is a high density of banks relative to investment opportunities, the result of too many banks competing for too few CRA-qualified investments can be declining returns.
Meanwhile, other areas have a difficult time attracting capital not because the social return on investment is low, but rather because they are not in a bank's major market, if they are served by a bank at all.
However we define a bank's assessment areas in the future, the regulations need to be designed and implemented in a way that encourages banks to direct their community investment activities productively.
The third guiding principle is that the CRA regulations should be tailored to banks of different sizes and business models.
We should set standards that are flexible enough to evaluate the CRA performance of a $100 million bank no less effectively than a $2 trillion bank.
Banks seek clearer, simpler rules that result in more CRA activity with less burden.
We believe this can be done while retaining the flexibility to evaluate a bank's CRA performance in light of its size, business model, capacity, and constraints as well as its community's demographics, economic conditions, and credit needs and opportunities.
Regulatory revisions that do not contemplate evaluating CRA performance in context could arguably undermine the CRA's greatest attribute--its recognition that banks are uniquely situated to be responsive to the most important community and economic development needs in their communities.
The typical small community bank focuses on serving its community through deposit and credit products and may not have the capacity to finance a major community development initiative.
But as banks grow in size or specialize in different types of lending, they may have greater capacity to invest through additional channels.
We will want to maintain the flexibility to ensure that, no matter the business line, a bank can meet its CRA obligation by doing what it has the expertise to do well.
And as we look to improve our CRA evaluations, the agencies will need to determine what kind of data will be necessary to evaluate a bank's CRA performance based on the activities it chooses and which banks should collect and report that data based on their scale and business model.
The members of our Federal Advisory Council have recommended that the regulations "need to be consistent across the [a]gencies and provide for all regulated financial institutions to be subject to the same CRA 'crediting', examination, and remedial standards."14 Banks have expressed understandable concern regarding the variation they see in evaluations.
Banks seek greater clarity in advance about what activities will qualify for CRA consideration.
The community organizations and local governments that are trying to attract bank financing to their projects need this clarity, too.
Regulatory streamlining can help to promote consistency, as would regular examiner training.
The central thrust of the CRA is to encourage banks to ensure that all creditworthy borrowers have fair access to credit.
For banks to be successful in meeting the credit needs of their entire community, it follows that they must guard against discriminatory or unfair and deceptive lending practices.
Ensuring fair access to credit is difficult and requires ongoing vigilance.15 For this reason, taking a holistic view of closely related issues is likely to be the best way to fulfill the purpose of the CRA, as one of several important laws intended to promote fair financial access.
They may need to turn to costly short-term sources of credit to cover emergency expenses.
The supply of affordable housing is a good example of a problem of national scope whose solution must be tailored to local needs and economic conditions.
Local decisions on land use, zoning, taxes, and leveraging of federal funding, and whether community needs are prioritized, are at the heart of whether neighborhoods thrive.
Still, the CRA is one of the important policy levers that can make a difference by encouraging solutions that are tailored to local needs and circumstances.
It does this by encouraging banks to provide affordable and sustainable mortgage products to qualified low- and moderate-income families.
In addition, by encouraging banks to work with the community to identify tailored rental and homeownership investment opportunities, the CRA helps encourage the construction of affordable housing where it is needed most.
In our effort to refresh the CRA regulations, we will continue to honor the purpose of the CRA by encouraging banks to engage in local community and economic development initiatives.
We should do more to encourage banks to offer deposit and credit products designed to help rent-burdened customers save for homeownership and build strong credit scores that will enable them to succeed in obtaining mortgage credit on favorable terms.
We should do more to encourage banks to lend to the underserved entrepreneurs and small businesses that hold the promise of providing jobs and growing local economies.
Even as the economy looks strong overall, significant challenges remain for low- and moderate-income areas, making the CRA and its focus on local credit needs more important than ever.
I am grateful to Theresa Stark of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing these remarks.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
According to the most recent report by the New York City Comptroller, the city's GDP grew 2.7 percent in the first quarter of 2018 as compared to 2.3 percent for the nation, and the unemployment rate for the city fell to 4.3 percent, the lowest rate on record.
See "NYC Economic Growth Slows Down, but Still Surpasses the Nation".
See, for example, Lael Brainard, Why Opportunity and Inclusion Matter to America's Economic Strength, May 22, 2017.
Studies have shown inequality is associated with lower long-term growth and with lower income growth.
Price, How Are Economic Inequality and Growth Connected: A Review of Recent Research (PDF) (Washington, DC: Washington Center for Equitable Growth, October 2014).
See http://news.nationalgeographic.com/2016/10/housing-discrimination-redlining-maps/ for details about how maps created by the Home Owners' Loan Corporation in the 1930s were used to designate areas considered hazardous for mortgage lending and influenced whether mortgage loans qualified for government guarantees from the Federal Housing Administration.
Canner, "Mortgage Market Conditions and Borrower Outcomes: Evidence from the 2012 HMDA Data and Matched HMDA-Credit Record Data," Federal Reserve Bulletin 99 (November 2013).
Another analysis found evidence of a substantial increase in mortgage lending due to the CRA--especially among low-income borrowers--with no measurable rise in the likelihood of default; see Daniel Ringo, "Mortgage Lending, Default, and the Community Reinvestment Act," June 15, 2017.
Federal Reserve Board Federal Advisory Council, Record of Meeting (PDF), May 2018.
Federal Reserve Board Community Advisory Council, Record of Meeting (PDF), May 4, 2018.
Nguyen, Do Bank Branches Still Matter? The Effect of Closings on Local Economic Outcomes, October 2015.
Even in areas with plenty of bank branches, declines in small businesses lending because of the loss of the relationship between a small business owner and their loan officer were significant.
The impact of branch closures were found to be more severe in tracts with lower median income, a higher fraction of minority households, and where firms were, on average, closer to their lending.
Federal Reserve Board Federal Advisory Council, Record of Meeting, May 2018.

Trust Everyone--But Brand Your Cattle: Finding the Right Balance in Cross-Border Resolution
At "Ring-Fencing the Global Banking System: The Shift towards Financial Regulatory Protectionism" Symposium sponsored by Harvard Law School Program on International Financial Systems, Harvard Law School, Cambridge, Massachusetts
Like many of my international counterparts in the audience, I maintain a deep commitment to cross-border banking and efficient movement of capital and liquidity, which are important contributors to long-term economic growth.
Many here use the term to describe local capital and liquidity requirements, which are imposed ex ante on local subsidiaries and designed to protect those entities and their creditors from losses.
Both uses of the term are associated with the risk arising from the stress or failure of a global financial institution; however, whether ring-fencing as I first defined it--prepositioning--is helpful or harmful in minimizing this risk depends on one's perspective.
The views of different stakeholders tend to vary depending on whether one is seeking to maximize efficient allocation of resources in good times or minimize losses in stress and, importantly, whether one is a home or host regulator.
Before the financial crisis, much of our collective orientation was on maximizing the efficient flow of capital across the globe.
Yet in the wake of the financial crisis, global regulators have understandably also focused on minimizing the cost of the failure of a global financial institution by mitigating the impediments to cross-border resolution.
The single-point-of-entry (SPOE) and bail-in concepts hold particular promise for most large global firms.
However, a successful SPOE resolution of a large global firm has not yet been attempted and will require close cooperation among a large number of stakeholders, including both home and host country regulators.
As with other elements of our regime, I have been considering whether our current prepositioning requirements for domestic and foreign firms operating in the United States are both minimizing this risk and functioning in an efficient and transparent manner, and I will share some thoughts in that regard.
Our vantage point in the United States as a large home and host regulator would counsel that it is sensible to find a middle ground and fine tune our approach as we learn more and global conditions evolve.
To enable cooperation and avoid a destabilizing seizure of assets by host regulators, I would submit that all jurisdictions must find a balance of flexibility for the parent bank and certainty for local stakeholders.
Flexibility, or the ability to allocate capital and liquidity to different parts of the group on an as-needed basis, helps to meet unexpected demands on resources and reduces the risk of misallocation and inefficient use of resources.
Certainty, or the local prepositioning of capital and liquidity to ensure a firm can satisfy local claimants under stressful conditions, helps to promote cooperation in the context of a cross-border resolution and avoid incentives for more drastic action by host authorities.
One's assessment of the optimal balance, as I alluded to earlier, can depend significantly on where one sits in the regulatory constellation.
The home regulator, by nature, will logically prefer flexibility in a resolution; consolidated capital and liquidity requirements are most effective if resources can be freely allocated around the consolidated firm where and when they are needed.
Flexibility also helps offset the uncertainty in forecasting the location within the consolidated firm where stress may arise.
Yet I would also argue that home regulators should recognize host jurisdictions may take action to restrict the flow of resources, or worse yet, demand resources in the moment of crisis, even if the stress does not originally emanate from their location.
This is particularly the case if the risk of default or the potential local loss given default of a foreign firm is high, and the tolerance for a government-assisted intervention for foreign banks is low.
However, the host regulator should also recognize that it is ultimately in its interest for the SPOE resolution of the foreign bank to be successful and, given the uncertainty of the circumstances or location of losses that emerge in an actual stress, adequate flexibility for the parent to deploy resources where needed is likewise in the host regulator's interest.
A global bank has other stakeholders who have preferences regarding flexibility or certainty and can take actions that can potentially destabilize the firm.
For instance, parent company debt and equity holders may prefer less prepositioning, while local creditors and financial market utilities may prefer more.
Building a system that is transparent and is perceived by stakeholders as allocating losses fairly is key in this regard.
Finally, I would like to note that the considerations of policymakers in determining the right balance of flexibility and certainty may differ depending on whether the resource at issue is capital or liquidity.
In resolution, the most important difference between capital and liquidity is the speed with which financial stress can appear.
Liquidity needs are sudden and tend to manifest in all areas of the organization, and the consequences of not meeting liquidity demand--an immediate default on an obligation--can be grave.
Capital needs, however, may be more localized and slower to evolve but are foundational to the execution of an SPOE resolution.
Historically, the United States and the United Kingdom have been in a unique position of having large interests as both home country and host country regulators of internationally active banks.
We understand that any requirements we impose on foreign banks operating in the United States may well be imposed on U.S.
In addition, we are operating under a veil of ignorance, as we don't know whether the next firm in distress will be a U.S.
global systemically important banking organizations (G-SIBs), we and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) have used the living wills process to set the expectation that a firm appropriately balance prepositioned and centrally managed resources.2 This expectation is based on the premise that the optimal balance will depend on factors such as the firm's structure and the host jurisdictions in which the firm operates.
As such, the Board and the FDIC have asked U.S.
G-SIBs to analyze and anticipate capital and liquidity resources needed to ensure the continued operation of material entities in resolution.
G-SIB's internal total loss absorbing capacity (TLAC) should reflect a balance of certainty--prepositioning internal TLAC directly at material entities--and flexibility--holding recapitalization resources at the parent, known as contributable resources--to meet unanticipated losses at material entities.3
G-SIB to appropriately estimate and maintain sufficient liquidity for material entities, an expectation known as Resolution Liquidity Adequacy and Positioning, or RLAP.4 RLAP expectations are intended to be designed so that liquidity is not "double counted" among home and host jurisdictions, to provide transparency into the location of liquidity across the firm's material entities, and to ensure that liquidity can flow where needed with minimal potential disruption.
The RLAP approach is aimed at ensuring that surpluses in one host jurisdiction generally are not relied upon to meet deficits in another host jurisdiction, given the confusion and vulnerabilities such reliance can cause in an actual stress.
Specifically, a firm should be able to measure the stand-alone liquidity position of each material entity and ensure that liquidity is readily available either at the parent or at that entity to meet any deficits.5 As with capital, firms are expected to have a balance of prepositioned and centrally managed liquidity--specifically, by balancing the certainty associated with holding liquidity directly at material entities against the flexibility provided by holding high-quality liquid assets at the parent available to meet unanticipated outflows at material entities.
As a host regulator, our approach to local capital and liquidity regulations of foreign banks with large U.S.
operations is motivated by the lessons of the recent financial crisis, where many foreign banks operating in the United States suffered severe stress and survived only with extraordinary support from the United States and their home country governments.
operations of foreign banks, our approach also reflects both resolution and competitive equity considerations.
From a resolution perspective, our rules seek to ensure that there are sufficient resources in the United States today to ensure that we, as a host regulator, are well positioned to cooperate with a home country authority in the event a firm experiences material stress or failure.
Our rules also ensure that we do not have a strong incentive to limit flows or seek additional resources in the moment of crisis, which could be highly destabilizing in a stress event.
subsidiaries of foreign banks should operate on a level playing field with their domestic counterparts.
This is generally consistent with the long-standing treatment of large and complex bank and nonbank subsidiaries around the world.
As such, our rules subject a large foreign bank to the same capital and liquidity requirements as domestic bank holding companies by requiring the foreign bank to hold its U.S.
intermediate holding company (IHC) and imposing capital and liquidity requirements to the IHC.
At the same time, we have adjusted our approach for the U.S.
branches, we have imposed local liquidity requirements in light of the liquidity vulnerabilities that many U.S.
branches of foreign banks experienced in the crisis, but no separate capital requirements.
For IHCs that are subsidiaries of foreign-owned G-SIBs, the Federal Reserve requires such a firm to issue a minimum amount of loss-absorbing instruments to its foreign parent, known as internal TLAC, including a minimum amount of unsecured long-term debt.6 In the event that an IHC was experiencing significant financial distress, the internal TLAC could be used to replenish the IHC's equity and maintain its solvency.
implementation of internal TLAC is modeled on the internal TLAC framework developed by the Financial Stability Board (FSB), which includes a calibration of the amount of loss-absorbing resources that should be prepositioned in a given jurisdiction.7 Specifically, the FSB contemplates that internal TLAC requirements of a subsidiary of a foreign bank expected to be resolved through SPOE would be calibrated at 75 to 90 percent of the external TLAC requirement that would apply to the subsidiary if it were to be separately resolved.
In implementing the TLAC standards in the United States, the Board calibrated the internal TLAC requirement for IHCs of foreign-owned G-SIBs at the high end of the FSB range, at around 90 percent.
The first is that some amount of local capital and liquidity prepositioning can reduce the incentives for damaging and unpredictable seizures of resources by local regulators during times of stress--thus actually reducing the likelihood that improvised, beggar-thy-neighbor ring-fencing would frustrate completion of a successful SPOE resolution in the future.
The second point, however, is equally important: the best prepositioning structure is not an eternal verity mathematically deducible from first principles, but it is instead a practical balance designed to promote cooperation among humans, and any such balance is likely to be improvable with experience, reflection, and debate.
We are interested in views from the firms and the public on how the regimes can be improved, and we expect to invite public comment on our living will guidance for U.S.
In addition, we are currently weighing the costs and benefits of our current approach of directing firms to determine the appropriate amount of prepositioned capital and liquidity.
We are also considering whether formalizing resolution capital and liquidity requirements through a rulemaking process would improve the predictability and transparency of our approach.
We continue to believe that the IHC and attendant requirements are appropriate for foreign banks with large U.S.
However, in light of our experience with these structures, I believe we should consider whether the internal TLAC calibration for IHCs could be adjusted to reflect the practice of other regulators without adversely affecting resolvability and U.S.
The current calibration is at the top end of the scale set forth by the FSB, and willingness by the United States to reconsider its calibration may prompt other jurisdictions to do the same, which could better the prospects of successful resolution for both foreign G-SIBs operating in the United States, and for U.S.
We are committed to working with other jurisdictions to continue to build the foundation of the SPOE resolution framework.
In addition to finding the appropriate balance of flexibility and certainty that I have discussed, we continue to advocate for increasing the standardization in the global implementation of the regulatory capital rules, improving host supervisors' transparency into the global liquidity and capital positions of a G-SIB on a consolidated and deconsolidated basis, and addressing impediments to a successful SPOE resolution.
As with all regulations, we will be open to considering adjustments that would improve transparency and efficiency and will continue to reassess our regime as we make advancements in developing the cross-border resolution framework.
"Home regulator" refers to the prudential regulatory agency of the parent bank, and "host regulator" refers to the prudential regulatory agency of a foreign branch or subsidiary of the parent bank.
If the Federal Reserve and the FDIC determine that a firm's resolution plan is not credible or would not facilitate an orderly resolution under the U.S.
The liquidity position of an entity reflects high-quality liquid assets at the material entity less stressed net outflows to third parties and affiliates.
Financial Stability Board, "Principles on Loss-Absorbing and Recapitalisation of G-SIBs in Resolution" and "Total Loss-absorbing Capacity (TLAC) Term Sheet" (November 9, 2015), available at www.fsb.org/wp-content/uploads/TLAC-Principles-and-Term-Sheet-for-publication-final.pdf.

At the Decoding Digital Currency ConferenceSponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, California
Because of the transformative potential of digital currency and distributed ledger technologies, the Federal Reserve is actively monitoring digital innovations in the financial system.
We have been keenly evaluating developments in fintech and digital currencies through a multidisciplinary lens, combining information technology and policy analysis to study their potential implications for payments policy, supervision and regulation, financial stability, monetary policy, and the provision of financial services.
This work draws from expertise throughout the Federal Reserve System and benefits from engagement with our colleagues internationally.
The past decade has seen a wave of important new developments in digital technologies for payments, clearing, and settlement.
At the heart of any cryptocurrency is the creation of a new type of asset--the unit of the cryptocurrency itself--that is distinct from any traditional form of money used in routine transactions, such as U.S.
currency and reserve balances, which are liabilities of the Federal Reserve Banks, and deposit accounts, which are liabilities of a bank or another regulated depository institution backed by federal insurance up to a specific level.
And while a typical cryptocurrency may be used in payments, it is not legal tender, in contrast to U.S.
Traditionally, this validation would be done by banks and payment networks.
In addition to losses, individual investors should be careful to understand the potential for other risks.3 Cryptocurrencies may raise important investor and consumer protection issues.
Ultimately, a more holistic approach to the security of the broader cryptocurrency ecosystem, along with added layers of security on top of cryptography, are likely to be necessary for cryptocurrencies to be widely adopted.
Some cryptocurrencies also appear quite vulnerable to money-laundering (BSA/AML, or Bank Secrecy Act/anti-money-laundering) concerns.
Indeed, a cryptocurrency that mimics a bearer instrument and provides significant anonymity in transactions, including across borders, could raise significant concerns regarding the potential to facilitate illicit activities and associated money laundering.
For example, electronic instruments can be easily transferred and stored in large amounts, and peer-to-peer transactions outside of the United States could be very hard to prevent and detect.
Overall, however, the still relatively small scale of cryptocurrencies in relation to our broader financial system and relatively limited connections to our banking sector suggest that they do not currently pose a threat to financial stability.5 Of course, if cryptocurrencies were to achieve wide-scale use, or their impact were greatly magnified through leverage, the effects could be broader.
In particular, adverse developments and shifts in sentiment could cause a global rush to exit this market.
As we have seen in other speculative activity in the past, rush-for-the-exits behavior can aggravate price fluctuations, create trading difficulties, and even induce market breakdowns.
Thus, we will continue to monitor cryptocurrencies as they evolve, with particular vigilance for any signs of growing materiality to the broader financial system.
Given some of the inherent issues and challenges that cryptocurrencies pose for investor and consumer protection and the prevention of money laundering, some have advocated that central banks should create their own digital forms of currency as more stable and reliable alternatives to cryptocurrencies.
After all, a central bank digital currency could overcome the volatility risks associated with an unbacked asset with no intrinsic value by substituting a digital instrument that is the direct liability of the central bank.
Moreover, advocates suggest a central bank would be able to develop a transfer mechanism that has robust governance.
Even though central bank digital currencies may at first glance appear to address a number of challenges associated with the current crop of cryptocurrencies, this appeal may not withstand closer scrutiny.6 First, there are serious technical and operational challenges that would need to be overcome, such as the risk of creating a global target for cyberattacks or a ready means of money laundering.
For starters, with regard to money laundering risks, unless there is the technological capability for effective identity authentication, a central bank digital currency would provide no improvement over physical notes and could be worse than current noncash funds transfer systems, especially for a digital currency that could circulate worldwide.
In addition, putting a central bank currency in digital form could make it a very attractive target for cyberattacks by giving threat actors a prominent platform on which to focus their efforts.
Any implementation would need to adequately deal with a variety of cyber threats--especially for a reserve currency like the U.S.
Second, the issuance of central bank digital currency could have implications for retail banking beyond payments.
If a successful central bank digital currency were to become widely used, it could become a substitute for retail banking deposits.
This could restrict banks' ability to make loans for productive economic activities and have broader macroeconomic consequences.
Moreover, the parallel coexistence of central bank digital currency with retail banking deposits could raise the risk of runs on the banking system in times of stress and so have adverse implications for financial stability.
already make retail payments electronically using debit and credit cards, payment applications, and the automated clearinghouse network.
New private-sector real-time payments solutions are beginning to gain acceptance in the United States.
And the Faster Payments Task Force has laid out a roadmap embraced by a variety of stakeholders for a fast, ubiquitous, and secure payments system to be in place in the United States in the next few years.7 In short, a multiplicity of mechanisms are likely to be available for American consumers to make payments electronically in real time.
It is important for the Fed and other central banks to continue to research these issues as technology evolves, exploring the technical and economic possibilities and limitations of central-bank-issued digital currencies.
This is being discussed, for instance, for the use cases of interbank payments, securities settlements, and cross-border transactions, where the introduction of a digital token native to a platform may facilitate certain types of settlement.
Likewise, it is possible at some point in the future that a limited central bank digital instrument that serves as a settlement asset for wholesale payment and settlement activity may hold some promise.
Several central banks have been studying this issue, and we have been actively watching these developments.8 We are also interested in work that decouples the underlying distributed ledger technology from cryptocurrencies and attempts to build on the benefits of the technology, a topic to which I now turn.
Even if cryptocurrencies prove to have a very limited role in the future, the technology behind them is likely to live on and offer improvements in the way we transfer and record more traditional financial assets.
The industry has moved a number of these projects through a series of phases, often developing more incremental changes at first in order to gain confidence in the technology before tackling large projects with significant operational impacts.
Many of the use cases focus on the areas of post-trade clearing and settlement of securities transactions, cross-border payments solutions, and trade finance.
For example, post-trade reconciliation of securities transactions can be a time-consuming and resource-intensive process that involves numerous parties, operational steps, and message flows across the counterparties and their various agents involved in the transactions.
Distributed ledger technology has the potential to provide synchronized, real-time views for those counterparties and agents that can speed up the process and reduce errors.
Most projects are organized either as partnerships between technology and financial services firms or through consortia of technology firms, financial firms, and other interested parties.
Although the governance arrangements may need to evolve over time, one thing that is clear is that strong governance arrangements will be required to provide the coordinated operational and financial risk management for the critical clearing and settlement operations that underpin our financial markets.
As I highlighted in 2016, this technical challenge of achieving the necessary scale and through put is an important hurdle.9 Much of this challenge has been tied to the time it takes to achieve "consensus" on a distributed ledger.
Consequently, the industry and the academic community have focused a great deal of attention on various consensus methods that can provide greater scalability either by leveraging trust, which relaxes some operational and incentive constraints, or possibly by devising methods without trust that are much less resource intensive.
Some of the technology firms working with the financial industry are taking different approaches in this fast-moving arena.
Another important challenge for the industry has been leveraging distributed ledger technology while preserving the confidentiality of transactional information.
At its core, distributed ledger technology is a shared ledger across multiple nodes in a network, likely representing multiple firms and legal entities.
The financial industry, however, must develop distributed ledgers that adhere to laws, regulations, and policies that protect important information of the parties and their customers.
While questions remain about the usefulness and viability of each of these approaches, it is important to underscore that preserving confidentiality is an important area of research.
Finally, perhaps the biggest potential benefit for payments, clearing, and settlement of distributed ledger technology may be resiliency.
Distributed ledger technology may enable a network to continue to operate even if some of the nodes on the network are compromised because of the ability of the other nodes in the network to pick up the slack and continue processing transactions.
Given that resiliency is a key potential benefit of distributed ledger technology over existing platforms, it is critical to understand the trade-offs between resiliency and a consensus method that focuses on operational speed, or between resilience and confidentiality.
Although central bank digital currencies may be able to overcome some of the particular vulnerabilities that cryptocurrencies face, they too have significant challenges related to cybersecurity, money laundering, and the retail financial system.
I have highlighted a few key areas where the technology is advancing to deal with some important policy, business, and operational challenges.
The Federal Reserve is dedicated to continuing to monitor industry developments and conduct research in these vital areas.
I am grateful to David Mills of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Lael Brainard, "An Update on the Federal Reserve's Financial Stability Agenda" (speech delivered at the Center for Global Economy and Business, Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, NY, April 3, 2018).
See, for example, the recent joint Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures and Markets Committee report "Central Bank Digital Currencies (PDF)," March 2018.
A Fed-issued digital currency might have implications for the rates and terms of funding for U.S.
government as well as the transmission of monetary policy that I will not discuss here.
Lael Brainard, "The Use of Distributed Ledger Technologies in Payment, Clearing, and Settlement" (speech delivered at the Institute of International Finance Blockchain Roundtable, Washington, DC, April 14, 2016); and Lael Brainard, "Distributed Ledger Technology: Implications for Payments, Clearing, and Settlement" (speech delivered at the Institute of International Finance Annual Meeting Panel on Blockchain, Washington, DC, October 7, 2016).

Monetary Policy Influences on Global Financial Conditions and International Capital Flows
At "Challenges for Monetary Policy and the GFSN in an Evolving Global Economy" Eighth High-Level Conference on the International Monetary System sponsored by the International Monetary Fund and Swiss National Bank, Zurich, Switzerland
Our subject is the relationship between "center country" monetary policy and global financial conditions, and the policy implications of that relationship both for the center country and for other countries affected.
Today I will focus in particular on the role of U.S.
monetary policy in driving global financial conditions and capital flows.
To preview my conclusions, I will argue that, while global factors play an important role in influencing domestic financial conditions, the role of U.S.
And while financial globalization does pose some challenges for monetary policy, efforts to build stronger and more transparent policy frameworks and a more resilient financial system can reduce the adverse consequences of external shocks.
The well-known Mundell-Fleming "trilemma" states that it is not possible to have all three of the following things: free capital mobility, a fixed exchange rate, and the ability to pursue an independent monetary policy.
The trilemma does not say that a flexible exchange rate will always fully insulate domestic economic conditions from external shocks.1 And, indeed, that is not the case.
We have seen that integration of global capital markets can make for difficult tradeoffs for some economies, whether they have fixed or floating exchange rate regimes.
Since the Fed is the central bank of the world's largest economy and issuer of the world's most widely used reserve currency, it is to be expected that the Fed's policy actions will spill over to other economies.
To illustrate this point, the scatterplot on the left side of figure 1 focuses on movements in interest rates and exchange rates following Federal Reserve policy announcements.
interest rates after Fed policy actions (shown on the horizontal axis) lead to corresponding changes in the value of the dollar (shown on the vertical axis).
And because of the dollar's widespread use around the world, these changes in the dollar affect financial conditions abroad.
monetary policy on global financial conditions should not be overstated.
The Federal Reserve is not the only central bank whose actions affect global financial markets.
In fact, the United States is the recipient as well as the originator of monetary policy spillovers.
For example, as seen in figure 3, changes in German yields after European Central Bank policy decisions also pass through to U.S.
yields.3 More broadly, it is notable that although the Fed has raised its target interest rate six times since December 2015 and has begun to shrink its balance sheet, overall U.S.
domestic financial conditions have gotten looser, in part due to improving global conditions and central bank policy abroad.
monetary policy focuses on their effects on financial conditions in emerging market economies (EMEs).
Some observers have attributed the movements in international capital flowing to EMEs since the Global Financial Crisis primarily to monetary stimulus by the Fed and other advanced-economy central banks.4 The data do not seem to me to fit this narrative particularly well.
As illustrated by the blue dashed line in the left panel of figure 4, capital flows to EMEs were already very strong before the Global Financial Crisis, when the federal funds rate was comparatively high.
The subsequent surge in capital flows in 2009, as the crisis was abating, largely reflects a rebound from the capital flow interruption during the crisis itself, though highly accommodative monetary policies in advanced economies doubtless also played a role.
Moreover, capital flows to EMEs started to ease after 2011, a period when the Federal Reserve continued to add accommodation and reduce yields through increases in its balance sheet, as shown in the right panel.
And, more recently, capital flows to EMEs have picked up again despite the fact that the Fed has been removing accommodation since 2015.
monetary policy is not the major determinant, what other factors have been driving EME capital flows? One prominent factor has been growth differentials between EMEs and advanced economies.
In figure 5, the left panel shows that capital inflows to EMEs picked up post-crisis, in line with the widening of this growth differential, while the slowdown in inflows after 2011 coincides with its narrowing.
The pickup in both global growth and commodity prices over the past couple of years explains a good part of the recent recovery of capital flows to EMEs.5
Monetary stimulus by the Fed and other advanced-economy central banks played a relatively limited role in the surge of capital flows to EMEs in recent years.
There is good reason to think that the normalization of monetary policies in advanced economies should continue to prove manageable for EMEs.
Fed policy normalization has proceeded without disruption to financial markets, and market participants' expectations for policy (the red symbols in figure 6) seem reasonably well aligned with policymakers' expectations in the Summary of Economic Projections (the black dots), suggesting that markets should not be surprised by our actions if the economy evolves in line with expectations.
Many EMEs have substantially improved their fiscal and monetary policy frameworks while adopting more flexible exchange rates, a policy that recent research shows provides better insulation from external financial shocks.6 Corporate debt at risk--the debt of firms with limited debt service capacity--has been rising in EMEs, as shown in figure 7.7 But this rise has been relatively limited outside of China and has begun to reverse as stronger global growth has pushed up earnings.
All that said, I do not dismiss the prospective risks emanating from global policy normalization.
Some investors and institutions may not be well positioned for a rise in interest rates, even one that markets broadly anticipate.
And, of course, future economic conditions may surprise us, as they often do.
Moreover, the linkages among monetary policy, asset prices, and the mood of global financial markets are not fully understood.
monetary policy also influences capital flows through its effects on global risk sentiment, with looser policy leading to more positive sentiment in markets and tighter policy depressing sentiment.8 While those channels may well operate, research at both the Fed and the IMF suggests that actions by major central banks account for only a relatively small fraction of global financial volatility and capital flow movements.9
Nevertheless, risk sentiment will bear close watching as normalization proceeds around the world.
What can the Federal Reserve do to foster continued financial stability and economic growth as normalization proceeds? We will communicate our policy strategy as clearly and transparently as possible to help align expectations and avoid market disruptions.
And we will continue to help build resilience in the financial system and support global efforts to do the same.
"Global Price of Risk and Stabilization Policies (PDF)," paper presented at "Eighteenth Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference: The Global Financial Cycle," sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 2-3.
"Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies: A Brave New World?" Journal of International Money and Finance, vol.
"Understanding the Slowdown in Capital Flows to Emerging Markets," chapter 2 in World Economic Outlook: Too Slow for Too Long.
"How Important Is the Global Financial Cycle? Evidence from Capital Flows," IMF Working Paper 17/193.
"Taper Tantrums: QE, Its Aftermath, and Emerging Market Capital Flows," NBER Working Paper Series 23474.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 18.
and German Bond Yields (PDF)," International Finance Discussion Papers 1226.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April.
"Capital Flows, Push Versus Pull Factors and the Global Financial Crisis," Journal of International Economics, vol.
"Are Countries Losing Control of Domestic Financial Conditions?" chapter 3 in Global Financial Stability Report: Getting the Policy Mix Right.
"A Bumpy Road Ahead," chapter 1 in Global Financial Stability Report: A Bumpy Road Ahead.
"What Drives Capital Flows to Emerging Markets? A Survey of the Empirical Literature," IIF Working Paper.
"Is There a Dilemma with the Trilemma?" Centre for Economic Policy Research, Vox, September 27.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January 19.
Monetary Policy and the Global Financial Cycle," NBER Working Paper Series 21722.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, November (revised February 2018).
"A Tie That Binds: Revisiting the Trilemma in Emerging Market Economies," IMF Working Paper WP/17/130.
"Corporate Finance Lessons from the East Asian Crisis (PDF)," Viewpoint: Public Policy for the Private Sector, Note 155.
"Prospects for Emerging Market Economies in a Normalizing Global Economy," speech delivered at the 2017 Annual Membership Meeting of the Institute of International Finance, Washington, October 12.
"Competitive Monetary Easing--Is It Yesterday Once More?" speech delivered at the Brookings Institution, Washington, April 10.
"Dilemma Not Trilemma: The Global Financial Cycle and Monetary Policy Independence," NBER Working Paper Series 21162.
Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, May (revised February 2018).
See, for example, Adrian and others (2017) and the IMF's most recent Global Financial Stability Report (2018) for discussion of the transmission of global risk shocks to domestic macroeconomic conditions.
Curcuru, De Pooter, and Eckerd (2018) find that about half of the movement in German bund yields in a window following ECB monetary policy announcements spills over to U.S.
Treasury yields, roughly the same magnitude as the spillover of movements in U.S Treasury yields to German bund yields following Federal Reserve policy announcements.
Studies looking at the determinants of EME capital flows include Chari and others (2017), Clark and others (2016), Bems and others (2016), Koepke (2015), Ahmed and Zlate (2014), Fratzscher (2012), and Ghosh and others (2012).
These papers generally conclude that many factors, including both "pull" and "push," affect EME capital flows.
The results in IMF (2017) also indicate that while global financial conditions explain a significant portion of countries' domestic financial conditions, domestic monetary policy changes also play an important role in economies with flexible exchange rates.
The interest coverage ratio (ICR) is the ratio of earnings before interest, tax, depreciation, and amortization to interest expense.
For example, just before the Asian financial crisis, firms in Korea, Thailand, and Indonesia had an average ICR of 2; see Pomerleano (1998).
For more on evolution of EME debt at risk and vulnerabilities, see Powell (2017).
monetary policy variables account for only roughly 10 percent of the six-month ahead forecast error variance of the VIX.
global factors (non-U.S industrial production, a global Economic Policy Uncertainty Index, and the expected probability of recessions outside of the United States) explain nearly as much of the VIX forecast error variance as U.S.
In addition, Cerutti, Claessens, and Rose (2017) find that directly observed variables in "center" countries (including VIX), as well as unobserved common dynamic factors extracted from actual capital flows, together rarely explain more than one-fourth of the variation in most types of capital flows.


Liquidity Regulation and the Size of the Fed's Balance Sheet
At "Currencies, Capital, and Central Bank Balances: A Policy Conference," a Hoover Institution Monetary Policy Conference, Stanford University, Stanford, California
Vice Chairman for Supervision Quarles updated his remarks to reflect their publication in Currencies, Capital, and Central Bank Balances.
Thank you very much to the Hoover Institution for hosting this important conference and to John Taylor and John Cochrane for inviting me to participate.1 In my capacity as both the Vice Chairman for Supervision at the Board of Governors and a member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), part of my job is to consider the intersection of financial regulatory and monetary policy issues, the subject of my discussion today.
This topic is both complex and dynamic, especially as both regulation and the implementation of monetary policy continue to evolve.
One important issue for us at the Fed, and the one that I will spend some time reflecting on today, is how post-crisis financial regulation, through its incentives for bank behavior, may influence the size and composition of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet in the long run.
Obviously, the whole excessively kaleidoscopic body of financial regulation is admittedly difficult to address in the time we have today, so I will focus on a particular component -- the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR--and its link to banks' demand for U.S.
Besides illuminating this particular issue, I hope my discussion will help illustrate the complexities associated with the interconnection of regulatory and monetary policy issues in general.
As such, my thoughts on these issues are my own and are likely to evolve, benefiting from further discussion and our continued monitoring of bank behavior and financial markets over time.
Before I delve into the more specific complicated subject of how one type of bank regulation affects the Fed's balance sheet, let me say a few words about financial regulation more generally.
As I have said previously, I view promoting the safety, soundness, and efficiency of the financial system as one of the most important roles of the Board.
Improving efficiency of the financial system is not an isolated goal.
Take, for example, the Board's two most recent and material proposals, the stress capital buffer and the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio (eSLR).
The proposal to modify the eSLR, in particular, initially raised questions in the minds of some as to whether it would reduce the ability of the banking system to weather shocks.
The proposed change simply restores the original intent of leverage requirements as a backstop measure to risk-based capital requirements.
We had initially calibrated the leverage ratio at a level that caused it to be the binding constraint for a number of our largest banks.
As a result, those banks had an incentive to add risk rather than reduce risk in their portfolios because the capital cost of each additional asset was the same whether it was risky or safe, and the riskier assets would produce the higher return.
The proposed recalibration eliminates this incentive by returning this leverage ratio to a level that is a backstop rather than the driver of decisions at the margin.
Yet, because of the complex way our capital regulations work together--with risk-based constraints and stress tests regulating capital at both the operating and holding company levels--this improvement in incentives is obtained with virtually no change in the overall capital requirements of the affected firms.
Federal Reserve staff estimate the proposal would potentially reduce capital requirements across the eight large banks subject to the proposal by $400 million, or 0.04 percent of the $955 billion in capital these banks held as of September 2017.2 So this recalibration is a win-win: a material realignment of incentives to reduce a regulatory encouragement to take on risk at a time when we want to encourage prudent behavior without any material capital reduction or cost to the system's resiliency.
Taken together, I believe these new rules will maintain the resiliency of the financial system and make our regulation simpler and more risk sensitive.
Let me now back up to the time just before the financial crisis and briefly describe the genesis of liquidity regulations for banks.
Banking organizations play a vital role in the economy in serving the financial needs of U.S.
They perform this function in part through the mechanism of maturity transformation--that is, taking in short-term deposits, thereby making a form of short-term, liquid investments available to households and businesses, while providing longer-term credit to these same entities.
This role, however, makes banking firms vulnerable to the potential for rapid, broad-based outflows of their funding (a so-called run), and these institutions must therefore balance the extent of their profitable maturity transformation against the associated liquidity risks.3 Leading up to the 2007-09 financial crisis, some large firms were overly reliant on certain types of short-term funding and overly confident in their ability to replenish their funding when it came due.
Thus, during the crisis, some large banks did not have sufficient liquidity, and liquidity risk management at a broader set of institutions proved inadequate at anticipating and compensating for potential outflows, especially when those outflows occurred rapidly.4
In the wake of the crisis, central banks and regulators around the world implemented a combination of regulatory reforms and stronger supervision to promote increased resilience in the financial sector.
With regard to liquidity, the prudential regulations and supervisory programs of the U.S.
banking agencies have resulted in significant increases in the liquidity positions and changes in the risk management of our largest institutions.
And, working closely with other jurisdictions, we have also implemented global liquidity standards for the first time.
These standards seek to limit the effect of short-term outflows and extended overall funding mismatches, thus improving banks' liquidity resilience.
One particular liquidity requirement for large banking organizations is the Liquidity Coverage Ratio, or LCR, which the U.S.
federal banking agencies adopted in 2014.5 The LCR rule requires covered firms to hold sufficient high-quality liquid assets (HQLA)‑‑in terms of both quantity and quality‑‑to cover potential outflows over a 30-day period of liquidity stress.
The LCR rule allows firms to meet this requirement with a range of cash and securities and does not apply a haircut to reserve balances or Treasury securities based on the estimated liquidity value of those instruments in times of stress.
Further, firms are required to demonstrate that they can monetize HQLA in a stress event without adversely affecting the firm's reputation or franchise.
The rules have resulted in some changes in the behavior of large banks and in market dynamics.
Large banks have adjusted their funding profiles by shifting to more stable funding sources.
Indeed, taken together, the covered banks have reduced their reliance on short-term wholesale funding from about 50 percent of total assets in the years before the financial crisis to about 30 percent in recent years, and they have also reduced their reliance on contingent funding sources.
Meanwhile, covered banks have also adjusted their asset profiles, materially increasing their holdings of cash and other highly liquid assets.
In fact, these banks' holdings of HQLA have increased significantly, from fairly low levels at some firms in the lead-up to the crisis to an average of about 15 to 20 percent of total assets today.6 A sizable portion of these assets currently consists of U.S.
central bank reserve balances, in part because reserve balances, unlike other types of highly liquid assets, do not need to be monetized, but also, importantly, because of the conduct of the Fed's monetary policy, a topic to which I will next turn.
How Does the LCR Interact with the Size of the Fed's Balance Sheet?
With this backdrop, a relevant question for monetary policymakers is, what quantity of central bank reserve balances will banks likely want to hold, and, hence, how might the LCR affect banks' reserve demand and thereby the longer-run size of the Fed's balance sheet? Let me emphasize that policymakers have long been aware of the potential influence that regulations may have on reserve demand and thus the longer-run size of the Fed's balance sheet.
And, of course, regulatory influences on banks' behavior, my focus today, is just one of many factors that could affect policymakers' decisions regarding the appropriate long-run size of the Fed's balance sheet.7 In particular, in augmenting its Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, the FOMC stated in June 2017 that it "currently anticipates reducing the quantity of reserve balances, over time, to a level appreciably below that seen in recent years but larger than before the financial crisis" and went on to note that "the level will reflect the banking system's demand for reserve balances and the Committee's decisions about how to implement monetary policy most efficiently and effectively in the future."8
With that said, it is useful to begin by examining banks' current reserve holdings.
Figure 1 plots the aggregate level of reserve balances in the U.S.
As you can see, the current level of reserves‑‑at around $2 trillion‑‑is many orders of magnitude higher than the level that prevailed before the financial crisis, a result of the Fed's large-scale asset purchase programs or "quantitative easing." The vertical lines in the figure show key dates in the implementation of the LCR, including the initial Basel III international introduction of the regulation followed by its two-step introduction in the United States.
A key takeaway from this figure is that the Fed was in the process of adding substantial quantities of reserve balances to the banking system while the LCR was being implemented‑‑and these two changes largely happened simultaneously.
As a result, banks, in aggregate, are currently using reserve balances to meet a significant portion of their LCR requirements.
In addition, because these changes happened together, it is reasonable to conclude that the current environment is likely not very informative about banks' underlying demand for reserve balances.
Last October, the Fed began to gradually and predictably reduce the size of its balance sheet.9 The Fed is doing so by reinvesting the principal payments it receives on its securities holdings only to the extent that they exceed gradually increasing caps‑‑that is, the Fed is allowing securities to roll off its portfolio each month up to a specific maximum amount.
So far, after the first seven months of the program, the Fed has shed about $120 billion of its securities holdings, which is a fairly modest amount when compared with the remaining size of its balance sheet.
Consequently, the level of reserves in the banking system is still quite abundant.
So, how many more reserve balances can be drained, and how small will the Fed's balance sheet get? Let me emphasize that this question is highly speculative‑‑we have not decided ex ante the desired long-run size of the Fed's balance sheet, nor, as I noted earlier, do we have a definitive handle on banks' long-run demand for reserve balances.
Indeed, the FOMC has said that it "expects to learn more about the underlying demand for reserves during the process of balance sheet normalization."10 Nonetheless, let me spend a little time reflecting on this challenging question.
How banks respond to the Fed's reduction in reserve balances could, in theory, take a few different forms.
One could envision that as the Fed reduces its securities holdings, a large share of which consists of Treasury securities, banks would easily replace any reduction in reserve balances with Treasury holdings, thereby keeping their LCRs roughly unchanged.
According to this line of thought, because central bank reserve balances and Treasury securities are treated identically by the LCR, banks should be largely indifferent to holding either asset to meet the regulation.
Alternatively, one could argue that banks may have particular preferences about the composition of their liquid assets.
And since banks are profit-maximizing entities, they will likely compare rates of return across various HQLA-eligible assets in determining how many reserves to hold.
If relative asset returns are a key driver of reserve demand, then interest rates across various types of HQLA will adjust on an ongoing basis until banks are satisfied holding the aggregate quantity of reserves that is available.
Recent research by the Board staff shows that banks currently display a significant degree of heterogeneity in their approaches to meeting their LCR requirements, including in their chosen volumes of reserve balances.11 Figure 2 shows a subset of this research to illustrate this point.
The top and bottom panels represent estimates of how two large banks have been meeting their HQLA requirements over time.
In each panel, the blue portions of the bars denote the share of HQLA met by reserve balances, while the red, yellow, and brown slices of the bars represent the share met by Treasury securities, agency mortgage-backed securities, and other HQLA-eligible assets, respectively.
Despite holding roughly similarly amounts of HQLA, the two banks exhibit very different HQLA compositions, with the bank depicted in the top panel consistently holding a much larger share of HQLA in the form of reserve balances than the bank shown in the bottom panel.
This finding suggests that there likely is no single "representative bank" behavioral model that can capture all we might want to know about banks' demand for central bank reserve balances.
Some of the differences we see in bank behavior likely relate to banks' individual liquidity needs and preferences.
Indeed, banks manage their balance sheets in part by taking into account their internal liquidity targets, which are determined by the interaction between the specific needs of their various business lines and bank management's preferences.
In any case, this picture illustrates the complexities that are inherent in understanding banks' underlying demand for reserve balances, a topic for which more research would be quite valuable to policymakers.
So, what does this finding say about the longer-run level of reserve balances demanded by banks? The answer is that there is a large degree of uncertainty.
In fact, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York surveyed primary dealers and market participants last December to solicit their views about the level of reserves they expect to prevail in 2025.12 A few features of the survey responses stand out.
All respondents thought that the longer-run level of reserve balances would be substantially lower than the current level of more than $2 trillion.
In addition, there appeared to be a widely held view that the longer-run level of reserves will be significantly above the level that prevailed before the financial crisis.
But even so, the respondents did not agree about what that longer-run level will be, with about half expecting a level ranging between $400 billion and $750 billion.
It is also important to point out that the Fed's balance sheet will remain larger than it was before the crisis even after abstracting from the issue of banks' longer-run demand for reserve balances.
The reason is that the ultimate size of the Fed's balance sheet also depends on developments across a broader set of Fed liabilities.
One such liability is the outstanding amount of Federal Reserve notes in circulation‑‑that is, paper money‑‑which has doubled over the past decade to a volume of more than $1.6 trillion, growing at a rate that generally reflects the pace of expansion of economic activity in nominal terms.
Recent growth in such items means that the longer-run size of the Fed's balance sheet will be noticeably larger than before the crisis regardless of the volume of reserve balances that might ultimately prevail.
Putting the various pieces together, figure 3 illustrates how the overall size of the Fed's balance sheet may evolve.
Given the uncertainties I have described, I have chosen to show three different scenarios, drawn from the most recent annual report released by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, which was published last month.13 These scenarios highlight the degree to which the longer-run size of the Fed's domestic securities portfolio‑‑also known as the System Open Market Account, or SOMA, which accounts for the vast majority of the Fed's assets‑‑will be affected by choices about the future level of reserve balances and the evolution of nonreserve liabilities.
The assumptions underlying the scenarios are based on the distribution of responses from the surveys I described earlier, as those surveys also asked respondents to forecast the likely longer-run levels of several liabilities on the Fed's balance sheet other than reserves.
The figure illustrates that the Fed's securities holdings are projected to decline about $400 billion this year and another $460 billion next year as Treasury and agency securities continue to roll off gradually from the Fed's portfolio.
The kink in each curve captures what the FOMC has referred to as the point of "normalization" of the size of the Fed's balance sheet‑‑that is, the point at which the balance sheet will begin to expand again to support the underlying growth in liabilities items such as Federal Reserve notes in circulation.
All else being equal, greater longer-run demand for currency, reserve balances, or other liabilities implies an earlier timing of balance sheet normalization and a higher longer-run size of the balance sheet, as illustrated by the top line.
In the three scenarios shown, the size of the Fed's securities portfolio normalizes sometime between 2020 and 2022.
That is quite a range of time, so as the balance sheet normalization program continues, the Fed will be closely monitoring developments for clues about banks' underlying demand for reserves.
What will the Fed be monitoring as reserves are drained and the balance sheet shrinks? I would first like to emphasize that the Fed regularly monitors financial markets for a number of reasons, so I do not mean to imply that we will be doing anything that is very much different for our normal practice.
As reserves continue to be drained, we will want to gauge how banks are managing their balance sheets in continuing to meet their LCRs, watching in particular how the distribution of reserve balances across the banking system evolves as well as monitoring any large-scale changes in banks' holdings of other HQLA-eligible assets, including Treasury securities and agency mortgage-backed securities.
And on the liabilities side of banks' books, we will be keeping our eye on both the volume and the composition of deposits, as there are reasons why banks may take steps, over time, to hold onto certain types of deposits more than others.
In particular, retail deposits may be especially desired by banks going forward because they receive the most favorable treatment under the LCR and also tend to be relatively low cost.
Retail deposits have grown quite a bit since the crisis, especially in light of the prolonged period of broad-based low interest rates and accommodative monetary policy, limiting the need for banks to compete for this most stable form of deposits.
However, the combination of rising interest rates and the Fed's shrinking balance sheet, together with banks' ongoing need to meet the LCR, may alter these competitive dynamics.
Of course, importantly, deposits will not necessarily decline one-for-one with reserve balances as the Fed's balance sheet shrinks.
The overall effects of the decline in the Fed's balance sheet will depend both on who ultimately ends up holding the securities in place of the Fed and on the full range of portfolio adjustments that other economic agents ultimately make as a result.14
In part, we will be tracking how the yields and spreads on the various assets that banks use to meet their LCR requirements evolve.
For example, to the extent that some banks will wish to keep meeting a significant portion of their LCR requirements with reserves, the reduction in the Fed's balance sheet and the associated drop in aggregate reserves could eventually result in some upward pressure on the effective federal funds rate and on yields of Treasury securities.
This situation could occur if some banks eventually find that they are holding fewer reserves than desired at a given constellation of interest rates and, in response, begin to bid for more federal funds while selling Treasury securities or other assets.
Interest rates will adjust up until banks are indifferent with regard to holding the relatively smaller volume of reserves available in the banking system.
Overall, we will be monitoring to make sure that the level of reserves the Fed supplies to the banking sector, which influences the composition of assets and liabilities on banks' balance sheets as well as market interest rates, provides the desired stance of monetary policy to achieve our dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices.
Of course, we will need to be very careful to understand the precise factors that underlie any significant movements in these areas, because factors that are unrelated to the Fed's balance sheet policies might also cause such adjustments.
To conclude, I would like to reemphasize that I have touched on some highly uncertain issues today--issues that, I would like to stress again, have not been decided by the FOMC.
One such issue that closely relates to my remarks today, and one I believe the upcoming panel will likely address, is which policy implementation framework the Fed should use in the long run.
That is, broadly speaking, should the Fed continue to use an operational framework that is characterized by having relatively abundant reserves and operate in what is termed a "floor regime," or should it use one in which the supply of reserves is managed so that it is much closer to banks' underlying demand for reserves as in a "corridor regime"?
First, a wide range of quantities of reserve balances--and thus overall sizes of the Fed's balance sheet--could be consistent with either type of framework.
liquidity regulations likely influence banks' demand for reserves, the Fed is not constrained by such regulations in deciding its operational framework, because U.S.
banks will be readily able to meet their regulatory liquidity requirements using the range of available high-quality liquid assets, of which reserve balances is one type.
Importantly, additional experience with the Federal Reserve's policy of gradually reducing its balance sheet will help inform policymakers' future deliberations regarding issues related to the long-run size of the Fed's balance sheet, issues that will not need to be decided for some time.
The final and most general point is simply to underscore the premise with which I began these remarks: Financial regulation and monetary policy are, in important respects, connected.
Thus, it will always be important for the Federal Reserve to maintain its integral role in the regulation of the financial system not only for the visibility this provides into the economy, but precisely in order to calibrate the sorts of relationships we have been talking about today.
The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Required capital at the bank subsidiaries of these firms would be reduced by larger amounts--and would only allow the firm to move that capital to different subsidiaries within the firm--but, more importantly, the overall capital regime prevents this capital from being distributed out of the banking organization as a whole except in this de minimis amount.
Thus, the overall organization retains the same capital levels without the structure of capital regulation creating an incentive to add risk to the system.
See Senior Supervisors Group (2009), Risk Management Lessons from the Global Banking Crisis of 2008 (PDF) (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, October).
LCR, including which banks are covered, see Regulation WW--Liquidity Risk Management Standards, 12 C.F.R.
Weinbach (2017), "How Have Banks Been Managing the Composition of High-Quality Liquid Assets? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-092 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August; revised February 2018).
For example, a separate factor that is relevant for policymakers in this regard is the FOMC's choice of long-run framework for monetary policy implementation.
For policymakers' discussions of this factor, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, July 26-27, 2016," press release, August 17; and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, November 1-2, 2016," press release, November 23, Return to text
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), "FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, June 14, paragraph 6.
The FOMC announced this change to its balance sheet policy in its September 2017 postmeeting statement; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 20.
The December 2017 Survey of Primary Dealers is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website at https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/markets/survey/2017/dec-2017-spd-results.pdf.
The December 2017 Survey of Market Participants is available at https://www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/media/markets/survey/2017/dec-2017-smp-results.pdf.
See Federal Reserve Bank of New York (2018), Open Market Operations during 2017 (New York: FRBNY, April), available at https://www.newyorkfed.org/markets/annual_reports.html.
Among other things, the report reviews the conduct of open market operations and other developments that influenced the System Open Market Account of the Federal Reserve in 2017.
For a discussion of the overall effects of the decline in the Fed's balance sheet, see Jane Ihrig, Lawrence Mize, and Gretchen C.
Weinbach (2017), "How Does the Fed Adjust Its Securities Holdings and Who Is Affected? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-099 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).


I am honored to be here today to participate in the Global Finance Forum.
It is a good moment to take stock of the cyclical position of the economy and the health of the banking system.1 In many respects, where we are today is the mirror image of where we were just a decade ago.
The job market is strong, household balance sheets have improved, and business activity is solid.
Banks are doing well--credit growth is robust, profitability is strong, and capital and liquidity buffers have been fortified.
If we have learned anything from the past, it is that we must be especially vigilant about the health of our financial system in good times, when potential vulnerabilities may be building.
Safeguarding resilience through the cycle should be a critical consideration in our ongoing evaluation of the regulatory framework.
With that in mind, I will spend a few minutes describing current conditions and then outline our ongoing work to ensure the financial system's buffers continue to sustain resilience over the cycle.
Our growth here at home has been bolstered by synchronized growth abroad as well as supportive financial conditions.
Employment growth has been heartening, and we are seeing the strong labor market continue to draw prime age Americans back into the labor force from the sidelines.
Sizable fiscal stimulus is likely to reinforce cyclical pressures at a time of above-trend growth and tightening resource utilization.
Currently, inflation appears to be well-anchored to the upside around our 2 percent target, but there are some signs of financial imbalances.
Our scan of financial vulnerabilities suggests elevated risks in two areas: asset valuations and business leverage.
First, asset valuations across a range of markets remain elevated relative to a variety of historical norms, even after taking into account recent market volatility.
Corporate bond yields remain low by historical comparison, and spreads of yields on junk bonds above those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities are near the lower end of their historical range.
In the nonfinancial business sector, the debt-to-income ratio has increased to near the upper end of its historical distribution, and net leverage at speculative-grade firms is especially elevated.
As we have seen in previous cycles, unexpected negative shocks to earnings in combination with increased interest rates could lead to rising levels of delinquencies among business borrowers and related stresses to some banks' balance sheets.
We continue to assess the overall vulnerabilities in the U.S.
financial system to be moderate by historical standards in great measure because post-crisis reforms have strengthened the regulatory and supervisory framework for the largest U.S.
The crisis revealed a stark weakness in the capital and liquidity positions of many of our large banking organizations that left many of them incapable of dealing with financial stress and necessitated unprecedented government intervention.
A primary focus of post-crisis financial reform has been strengthening capital and liquidity buffers at large banking institutions, which has bolstered the safety and soundness of these institutions and reduced systemic risk more broadly.
In terms of liquidity, not only do our largest firms now have the right kind and amount of liquidity calibrated to their funding needs and to their likely run risk in stressed conditions, but they also are required to know where it is at all times and to ensure it is positioned or readily accessible where it is most likely to be needed in resolution.
Prior to the crisis, many of the largest firms did not even have a good handle on where their liquidity was positioned.
For example, our largest banking firms have increased their holdings of high quality liquid assets from 12 percent of assets in 2011 to 20 percent of assets in 2017, and they have reduced their reliance on short-term wholesale funding from 37 percent of liabilities in 2011 to 25 percent of liabilities in 2017.2 This, combined with critical reforms to money market funds and other vital short-term funding markets, have reduced the vulnerabilities in the financial system associated with liquidity mismatch and maturity transformation.
In terms of capital, the quality of capital has improved with a particular focus on common equity, the most loss-absorbing form of capital.
The quantity of capital also has increased through higher minimum requirements and new capital conservation buffers that require banking firms to keep their capital levels well above the minimums in order to maintain full flexibility to allocate profits to capital distributions and employee bonus payments.
These buffers increase the ability of banking organizations to absorb losses and continue to lend to households and businesses, including during times of stress.
Indeed, the common equity capital to risk-weighted assets ratio of the bank holding companies participating in the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review has more than doubled from 5.5 percent in the first quarter of 2009 to 12 percent in the fourth quarter of 2017.3
We now regularly conduct comprehensive stress tests of the largest banking firms to help ensure that their capital distribution plans are consistent with their ability to lend and withstand severe macroeconomic and financial stress like that observed during the financial crisis.
One key benefit of our stress testing program is that it promotes a dynamic forward-looking assessment of a bank's capital adequacy in the face of severe stress.
It is critical to maintain a dynamic capital regime that anticipates rapidly changing risks and business conditions.
Without such a dynamic focus, there is a risk that regulators and banking institutions end up spending too much time looking in the rear-view mirror and not enough time looking ahead for emerging risks.
The stress testing capital regime applied to Fannie and Freddie before the crisis offers a sobering reminder of the dangers of failing to update stress tests in the face of changing market practices and emerging risks.
The Federal Reserve has also imposed risk-based and leverage capital surcharges on the most systemic banking firms to ensure they internalize the costs their failure would have on the financial system and to provide an incentive to reduce their systemic footprint.
We have recently released a proposal for comment to introduce a "stress capital buffer" or SCB that would integrate the forward-looking stress test results into each institution's ongoing capital requirements.
Some observers contend that current capital requirements are too onerous and are choking off credit.
bank lending has been healthy over recent years and profits are strong.
In that regard, the current level of capital is a sign of strength.
While there is a natural tendency to question the value of capital buffers when times are good, the severe costs associated with not having enough capital to absorb losses become all too evident in a downturn.
But it is vital to be prudent regarding any material changes to the core capital and liquidity framework, and not lose sight of the need to safeguard financial resilience through the cycle.
At this point in the cycle, it is premature to revisit the calibration of core capital and liquidity requirements for the large banking institutions.4
History suggests that a booming economy can lead to a relaxation in lending standards and an attendant increase in risky debt levels.
I would be reluctant to see our large banking institutions releasing the capital and liquidity buffers that they have built so effectively over the past few years, at a time when cyclical pressures and vulnerabilities in the broader financial system are building.
Indeed, if cyclical pressures continue to build and financial vulnerabilities broaden, it may become appropriate to ask the largest banking organizations to build a countercyclical buffer (CCyB) of capital to maintain an adequate degree of resilience against stress.
The CCyB is an additional margin of capital that the nation's largest banks can be asked to build to sustain resilience when there is an elevated risk of above-normal losses, which often follow periods of rapid asset price appreciation or credit growth.
This buffer is intended to be released as the economy weakens in order to allow banks to lend more when it is most needed.
Countercyclical capital requirements can lean against rising financial vulnerabilities at a time when the degree of monetary tightening that would be needed to achieve the same goal would be inconsistent with the dual mandate goals of full employment and price stability.
The CCyB framework, which was finalized in September 2016, requires the Federal Reserve Board to vote at least once per year on the level of the CCyB.
While other jurisdictions have developed some experience with the use of countercyclical buffers, in the United States, the CCyB has so far not yet been activated.
The condition set out in September 2016 for raising the CCyB above its minimum value of zero is that financial system vulnerabilities are meaningfully above normal.
When the CCyB rule was issued in September 2016, it was calibrated against the backdrop of the established levels of required U.S.
Thus, it would be prudent to accompany any consideration of material adjustments to the calibration of the structural buffers held by the large banking institutions, with compensating adjustments to the countercyclical buffer in order to achieve the same overall level of resilience through the cycle.
While we have made important progress in our regulatory framework, we still have not implemented a few key elements.
The list of remaining items is short but important and well anticipated.
This significant liquidity regulation is important to ensure that large banking firms maintain a stable funding profile over a one-year horizon.
It will serve as a natural complement to our existing liquidity coverage ratio, which helps ensure firms can withstand liquidity strains over a 30-day time horizon.
And by most estimates, our large complex banking institutions are in a position to meet the expected requirements with little adjustment.
These limits will reduce the chances that outsized exposures, particularly between large financial institutions, could spread financial distress and undermine financial stability as we witnessed during the last financial crisis.
Moreover, these large exposure limits will effectively update the traditional bank lending limits that proved useful for well over 100 years for today's challenges, by recognizing the many ways in which banks and their affiliates take on credit exposure beyond directly extending loans.
I support efforts to improve the efficacy of the Volcker rule while preserving its underlying goal of prohibiting banking firms from engaging in speculative activities for which federal deposit insurance and other safeguards were never intended.
The interagency regulation implementing the Volcker rule is not the most effective way of achieving its very laudable and important goal.
We should be able to provide firms and supervisors with greater clarity about what constitutes permissible market-making.
We should also identify ways to further tailor the Volcker compliance regime to focus on firms with large trading operations and reduce the compliance burden for small banking entities with limited trading operations.
I also support moving forward with minimum haircuts for securities financing transactions (SFTs) on a marketwide basis to counter the growth of volatile funding structures outside the banking sector.
International agreement on a regulatory framework for minimum SFT haircuts was reached by financial regulators in 2015, and it is important to follow through on this work plan.
While current market practices in this area may well exhibit much better risk management than pre-crisis, past experience suggests we cannot rely on prudent practices to remain in place as competitive and cyclical pressures build.
Regulatory minimum haircuts calibrated to be appropriate through the cycle could help ensure that repo, securities lending, and securities margin lending and related markets do not become a source of instability in periods of financial stress through fire sales and run-type behavior.
Here, I have focused primarily on the reforms that are most important for the resilience of the large interconnected banking organizations at the core of our system.
Outside of this group, I favor better tailoring the regulatory framework for our smaller banking firms so as to decrease regulatory burden.
While we have taken some important steps to reduce burden on smaller banking organizations such as streamlining the Call Report for small, less complex community banks, increasing appraisal thresholds for CRE loans, and reducing the frequency of exams in certain circumstances, there is more we should do.
History and experience show that stable economic growth is aided by strong regulatory buffers that bolster the resilience of our large banking organizations and help reduce the severity of downturns.
At a time when cyclical pressures are building, and asset valuations are stretched, we should be calling for large banking organizations to safeguard the capital and liquidity buffers they have built over the past few years.
Although I believe it is too early today to reassess the calibration of existing capital and liquidity buffers because they have yet to be tested through a full economic cycle, I look forward to efforts that are planned in future years in the international standard-setting bodies to assess the framework quantitatively.
I am grateful to Anna Harrington of the Federal Reserve Board for her assistance in preparing this text.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
These statistics reflect the 18 advanced approaches bank holding companies subject to the standard Liquidity Coverage Ratio.
These statistics are for the 18 bank holding companies that participated in both the 2009 and 2017 stress tests.
The risk-based capital statistics for 2009 report tier 1 common equity, and for 2017 report Basel III common equity tier 1.
Cost-benefit studies support capital requirements at current levels or higher.
See, for example, the review of evidence in Simon Firestone, Amy Lorenc, and Ben Ranish (2017), "An Empirical Economic Assessment of the Costs and Benefits of Bank Capital in the US (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-034 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April).

Community Development in Baltimore and A Few Observations on Community Reinvestment Act Modernization
At the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Baltimore Community Development Gathering, Baltimore, Maryland
I want to take a moment to thank you for giving us such great insights into all the important work that is taking place here in the neighborhoods of Baltimore.1 Every few months, I try to get out to some of the areas of the country where our Reserve Banks are engaged with community members, community development institutions, businesses, banks, and schools in efforts to create more vibrant communities.
I last had the pleasure of visiting Baltimore with community development staff from the Richmond Federal Reserve Bank in 2015.
Each visit teaches me so much more about the complexity of the challenges you face, the creativity of the solutions you devise, and ultimately the determination you all demonstrate to lift up the lives of all community members in this city.
Collectively, as community development professionals, concerned residents, and community partners, I can see the considerable progress you are making in the neighborhoods of Baltimore, although of course there is still plenty of work to be done.
We, at the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, recognize the unique challenges Baltimore faces, and we are committed to remaining focused on this city and to partnering where that can be helpful.
I am pleased that the Federal Reserve's Community Development team has been supporting your work and helping to convene collaborative endeavors, such as the Symposium on Workforce Transportation that occurred in February, and cross-state learning exchanges that connect community development leaders from Maryland and the Carolinas.
Perhaps the work that best exemplifies our commitment to understanding the complex dynamics of this city is the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond's Persistent Poverty Study.
The goal of this research initiative is to further understand the barriers and incentives that individuals living in persistent poverty face in making economic decisions.
This is an excellent conference that draws on resources from across the Federal Reserve System, along with Johns Hopkins University, to highlight effective models and emerging strategies for investing capital to foster economic growth by enabling every individual to contribute to and derive benefit from the economy.
The Federal Reserve System has a valuable perspective because we are in communities all across this nation and because as a supervisor we engage with banks as they seek to fulfill their affirmative obligations to meet the credit needs of their communities.
I have seen the value of the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) as a vital tool to address the credit needs of low- and moderate-income communities, and I believe the time is ripe for a refresh to make it even more relevant to today's challenges.
We look forward to working with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, with which we have traditionally issued joint rulemakings on CRA.
The Federal Reserve is deeply committed to the Community Reinvestment Act's goal of encouraging banks to meet their affirmative obligation to serve their entire community, and in particular the credit needs of low- and moderate-income communities.
As we have seen all over the country, when banks are inclusive in their lending, it helps low- and moderate-income communities to thrive by providing opportunities for community members to buy and improve their homes and to start and expand small businesses.
We employ an extraordinary group of CRA examiners and community development professionals to make sure that we do our part to help banks meet this obligation, as the statute directs.
We are very proud of the role we play in educating banks on the CRA's provisions, introducing them to potential partners in the community, and keeping them informed of best practices in the field.
In fact, one of CRA's important achievements has been to help foster the growth of the community development field by building stronger relationships between financial institutions and community and economic development professionals.
This development has expanded the number and range of opportunities for banks to lend and invest in safe and sound ways, benefiting both banks and their communities.
In the two decades since, there have been substantial changes in the ways that banks serve their customers and in the challenges faced by low- and moderate-income communities.
The time is ripe to modernize the CRA regulations to make them more effective in making credit available in low- and moderate-income areas at a time when technological and structural changes in the banking industry allow banks to serve customers outside of the areas with branches that have traditionally defined a bank's community.
As we update the rules, it should be possible to achieve better outcomes--both providing banks with the greater clarity and predictability they seek while also facilitating better provision of credit, investments, and banking services in low- and moderate-income areas.
First, we should seek to modernize the definition of assessment areas in such a way that the core focus remains the credit needs of local communities.
The definition in the existing CRA regulation of a bank's assessment area--that is, the area in which we evaluate a bank's CRA performance--reflects a banking environment when interstate banking was not yet allowed, and physical branches were necessary to serve the deposit and lending needs of bank customers.
Technological advances and changing consumer preferences have made it possible for banks to serve customers far outside of their physical branches--for example, online and on mobile devices.
At the same time, it is important to retain a focus on place--and in particular the credit needs of local communities.
We are confident that there are ways to expand the area where we evaluate a bank's CRA performance without losing the regulation's focus on the unique role banks play in meeting local credit needs and providing services that are only possible by using branches.
Second, banks should be encouraged to seek opportunities in areas that are underserved.
This emphasis has resulted in what banks and community organizations refer to as credit "hot spots" where there is a high density of banks relative to investment opportunities.
Meanwhile, other areas have a difficult time attracting capital because they are not in a bank's major market, if they are served by a bank at all.
Key priorities in any new set of regulations are to eliminate such market distortions and to avoid creating new ones.
No matter how we define a bank's assessment area in the future, new regulations need to be designed and implemented in a way that encourages banks to spread their community investment activities across the areas they serve.
Third, revised regulations should be tailored, recognizing that banks vary widely in size and business strategy and serve communities with widely varying needs.
Banks seek clearer, simpler rules that result in more CRA activity with less burden.
We believe this can be done while retaining the flexibility to evaluate a bank's CRA performance in light of its size, business strategy, capacity, and constraints as well as its community's demographics, economic conditions, and credit needs and opportunities.
We should not adopt a set of evaluation criteria that would be appropriate for large banks and assume that smaller community banks would be able to meet them without substantial additional burden.
Regulatory revisions that do not contemplate evaluating CRA performance in context risk undermining CRA's greatest attribute--its recognition that banks are uniquely situated to be responsive to the most impactful community and economic development needs in communities.
Clarity about the activities that qualify for CRA consideration, the area in which those activities will be considered, and the type of demographic and economic information examiners evaluate will go a long way toward promoting consistency.
In addition to regulatory revisions, however, the agencies can promote consistency in other, non-regulatory ways.
As banks seek to meet the credit needs of their entire community, it is important to ensure against discriminatory or unfair and deceptive lending practices.
I am very impressed with the important ways different kinds of organizations represented in this room are working in partnership to promote economic development here in your community.
I am grateful to Amanda Roberts and Theresa Stark of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance in preparing this text.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board.

At the Center for Global Economy and Business, Stern School of Business, New York University, New York, New York
The Federal Reserve's work on financial stability is integral to our dual-mandate objectives of price stability and full employment.
As the Global Financial Crisis demonstrated, when severe financial stress triggers a broad pullback from risk, the resulting disruption in financial intermediation can impose deep and lasting damage on American families, workers, and businesses.1
The primary focus of financial stability policy is tail risk (outcomes that are unlikely but severely damaging) as opposed to the modal outlook (the most likely path of the economy).
The objective of financial stability policy is to lessen the likelihood and severity of a financial crisis.
Guided by that objective, our financial stability work rests on four interdependent pillars: systematic analysis of financial vulnerabilities; standard prudential policies that safeguard the safety and soundness of individual banking organizations; additional policies, which I will refer to as "macroprudential," that build resilience in the large, interconnected institutions at the core of the system; and countercyclical policies that increase resilience as risks build up cyclically.2 This work also recognizes the important connections to our monetary policy objectives.
The foundation for our financial stability work is our assessment of systemic financial vulnerabilities.
Our assessment framework is informed by historical episodes of financial stress here at home and around the world, as well as by a growing body of research on key indicators of building imbalances.3 Instead of attempting to forecast particular adverse shocks that could buffet the economy, the focus is on vulnerabilities--that is, on features of the financial system that amplify bad shocks, spreading damage to households and businesses.
Each quarter, Federal Reserve Board staff assess a set of vulnerabilities relevant for financial stability: asset valuations and risk appetite, borrowing by the nonfinancial sector (households and nonfinancial businesses), liquidity risks and maturity transformation by the financial system, and leverage in the financial system.
Estimates of risk premiums and spreads in a range of markets remain narrow by historical standards.
Corporate bond yields remain low by historical comparison, and spreads of yields on junk bonds above those on comparable-maturity Treasury securities are near the lower-end of their historical range.
However, measures of credit conditions suggest that lenders are, to an extent, taking into account the potential for a reversion of valuations.
One area that the Federal Reserve is monitoring is the extreme volatility evidenced by some cryptocurrencies.
For instance, Bitcoin rose over 1,000 percent in 2017 and has fallen sharply in recent months.5 These markets may raise important investor and consumer protection issues, and some appear especially vulnerable to money-laundering (BSA/AML, or Bank Secrecy Act/anti-money laundering) concerns.
As in other highly speculative markets, individual investors should be careful to understand the possible pitfalls of these investments and the potential for losses.
In the assessment of elevated asset valuations, the relatively low level of Treasury yields is a mitigating factor; many asset valuation metrics, such as price-to-earnings ratios, corporate bond yields, and property capitalization rates, appear notably less stretched when judged relative to low Treasury yields.
This poses the risk that term premiums could rise sharply--for instance, if investor perceptions of inflation risks increased.
Although asset valuations are elevated, vulnerabilities due to debt owed outside the financial sector appear to be moderate--in the middle of their historical range.
In the nonfinancial business sector, the debt-to-earnings ratio has increased to near the upper end of its historical distribution, and net leverage at speculative-grade firms remains especially elevated.
While the sustained period of post-crisis household deleveraging appears to have come to an end and savings rates have recently moved down, overall borrowing has been at a moderate pace and, on net, concentrated among borrowers with high credit scores.
Even though the balance sheet of the household sector as a whole appears relatively strong, recent years have seen a rapid rise in student debt as well as rising default rates for borrowers with subprime credit scores on auto loans and, more recently, credit card balances.
Beyond the nonfinancial sector, the vulnerabilities associated with maturity and liquidity transformation in the financial system appear to have fallen significantly relative to the levels seen prior to the crisis.
The amount of wholesale short-term funding, which proved to be a substantial source of run risk during the crisis, has dropped substantially since its peak in 2008.
Money market funds, which had been an area of vulnerability in the crisis, have undergone important reforms, including a move to floating net asset values for prime institutional funds along with the imposition of fees and restrictions on redemption.
The anticipation of the enactment of these reforms in October 2016 led to a large decline in the level of assets under management at the affected funds, which has since held steady.
So far, the growth of alternative short-term investment vehicles that could pose similar risks appears to have been weak.
Issuance of securitized products remains well below pre-crisis levels for most asset classes, with few signs of securitizations that involve maturity or liquidity transformation and limited issuance of complex securities whose opaque structures can contain significant leverage.
And the data that are available suggest that leverage at nonbank financial firms has been stable.
That said, there are indications that the use of leverage has been increasing at some institutions; for example, margin credit provided by dealers to equity investors such as hedge funds has expanded.
There is an important connection between the robustness of our financial regulatory framework and the assessment of resilience in the financial sector.
The subdued level of vulnerabilities from liquidity and maturity transformation and leverage is due centrally to reforms undertaken in response to the financial crisis.
The Federal Reserve has implemented a framework of rules and supervision that requires large, interconnected banking organizations to hold substantial capital and liquidity buffers.
This framework requires banks to be forward looking in their capital decisions and to be prepared for the possibility of severely stressed conditions occurring.
The framework is macroprudential in design so that banks internalize the costs of undertaking activities that pose risks to the system.
The core of the framework is the requirement of a substantial stack of common equity to build resilience against shocks and to provide an incentive for prudent risk management.
Regulatory capital ratios for the largest banking firms at the core of the system have about doubled since 2007 and are currently at their highest levels in the post-crisis era.
firms have substantially increased their capital since the first round of stress tests led by the Federal Reserve in 2009.
The common equity capital ratio--which compares high-quality capital to risk-weighted assets--of the bank holding companies participating in the 2017 Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review has more than doubled from 5.5 percent in the first quarter of 2009 to 12 percent in the fourth quarter of 2017.
Their leverage ratios--defined as Tier 1 capital to total assets--increased from 7.3 percent to 8.6 percent over the same period.6 There has also been an important shift in the distribution of high-quality capital so that the average ratio of high-quality common equity to risk-weighted assets at the largest banks now exceeds the average for smaller banks.
Reduced vulnerability associated with liquidity and maturity transformation similarly is due importantly to key financial reforms instituted since the crisis.
Large financial institutions are required to maintain substantial buffers of high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) calibrated to their funding needs and to their likely run risk in stressed conditions.
Similar to the capital buffers, the liquidity buffers are greatest for those financial institutions that pose the greatest risks.
Indeed, banks are holding buffers of HQLA in excess of their liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) requirements.
Our largest banking firms have increased their holdings of HQLA from 13 percent of assets in 2011 to 20 percent in 2017 and have reduced their reliance on short-term wholesale funding from 36 percent of liabilities in 2011 to 29 percent in 2017.7
Just as our strengthened policy framework helps modulate vulnerabilities in the financial sector that could make the economy more vulnerable to shocks, so, too, our quarterly surveillance is intended to identify rising vulnerabilities early enough to be able to act to prevent disruptions that could damage the economy.
In particular, the quarterly assessment of financial stability is a critical input into the Board's processes for adjusting the supervisory scenarios used in the stress test and the setting of the countercyclical capital buffer--the two tools that permit the Board to respond to vulnerabilities that build over time.
The supervisory stress test is intended to ensure that large banking institutions will be able to continue to function normally even under severely adverse macroeconomic conditions.
It also assesses the resilience of the largest trading firms to risks of a large disturbance to global financial markets and the failure of the firms' largest counterparty.
These components reflect some of the key linkages through which the distress or failure of one firm could affect others, including direct credit losses as well as the severe financial disruptions that would be expected to accompany fire sales and an increase in risk aversion.
By design, the Fed's stress test is intended to incorporate some elements to make the tests more stringent when the economy and financial markets are heating up.
These countercyclical features are intended to give the stress tests some utility as a macroprudential tool--that is, to mitigate the financial system's inherent pro-cyclicality.
The most prominent countercyclical feature of the stress-test scenario architecture is the setting of the unemployment rate in the severely adverse scenario.
The general rule is to increase the unemployment rate by 4 percent unless the baseline unemployment rate starts at levels below 6 percent, in which case the ultimate level of the unemployment rate reached in the severely adverse scenario is fixed at 10 percent.
Beyond these systematic elements, the assessment of vulnerabilities is a critical input in the development of scenarios for the stress tests each year to strengthen resilience against vulnerabilities that may be identified.
As I noted earlier, recent assessments have noted high levels of valuations across a broad set of asset markets and elevated business leverage in an environment where Treasury yields and term premiums have been relatively low by historical standards.
In such circumstances, asset prices might be particularly susceptible to an unexpected development that accentuates downside risks to the macroeconomic outlook.
For instance, a sharp increase in concerns about the potential for high inflation or in uncertainty about policy could boost term premiums on Treasury securities, which could trigger declines in asset prices across a range of markets.
The scenarios for this year's stress tests, which were announced in February, feature material decreases in asset prices--notably including CRE prices--along with a substantial rise in Treasury term premiums.
Although the severely adverse scenarios always include severe recessions and sharp declines in asset prices, in past years, they have been accompanied by large declines in Treasury yields, which have resulted in capital gains on these securities.9 In contrast, in this year's severely adverse scenario, yields on longer-maturity Treasury securities are flat.
By encouraging institutions at the core of the system to build resilience against such an eventuality, we seek to lessen the severity of the distress to the overall financial system should asset prices fall and term premiums rise sharply in a challenging macroeconomic environment.
Indeed, the stress tests have become less binding on banks as the recovery has gathered strength.
Thus, losses on loans and positions in the severely adverse scenario among participating banks have declined over time as the economy has strengthened.
For example, in the 2016 exercise, losses amounted to $526 billion, while in 2017 they had fallen to $493 billion, despite a larger increase in the unemployment rate in the scenario.
As economic conditions strengthen, typical measures of underwriting quality look strong, delinquencies fall to low levels, and profits rise consistently, all of which could lead to lower projected stress losses.
Of course, these effects tend to reverse during bad economic conditions: Underwriting deficiencies tend to be revealed, delinquencies to rise, and profits to fall.
Thus, capital requirements based on stress tests alone are unlikely to completely compensate for the financial system's natural pro-cyclicality.
In part for that reason, we also have a specifically countercyclical capital requirement that applies to the largest banks.
Countercyclical capital requirements can lean against a dangerous increase in financial vulnerabilities at a time when the degree of monetary tightening that would be needed to achieve the same goal would be inconsistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate of full employment and price stability.
The countercyclical capital buffer (CCyB) is designed to increase the resilience of large banking organizations when there is an elevated risk of above-normal losses, which often follow periods of rapid asset price appreciation or credit growth that are not well supported by underlying economic fundamentals.
The CCyB is an additional margin of capital that the nation's largest banks can be asked to build to augment resilience at times of rising cyclical pressures and to release as the economy weakens in order to allow banks to lend more when it is most needed.
The CCyB framework, which was finalized in September 2016, requires the Federal Reserve Board to vote at least once per year on the level of the CCyB.
Our assessment of financial vulnerabilities is a key input into the Federal Reserve Board's decisions surrounding the setting of the CCyB, along with a variety of other model-based and judgmental criteria.
Of course, our assessments of financial vulnerabilities are also an important input into Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) deliberations, recognizing that there is important interdependence between financial stability and our monetary policy objectives of full employment and price stability.10 The FOMC Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy notes that "the Committee's policy decisions reflect...its assessments of the balance of risks, including risks to the financial system that could impede the attainment of the Committee's goals."11 Generally speaking, lessons from a broad range of countries suggest financial crises occur with substantially lower frequency than business cycles, and there is no settled doctrine to date on the use of the short-term policy rate--the key instrument of monetary policy--to lessen the probability and severity of financial crises.
While financial imbalances are an important consideration in monetary policymaking and the expected path of monetary policy can have important implications for financial vulnerabilities, both research and experience suggest there is no simple rule for accomplishing our dual-mandate and financial stability objectives through reliance on a single policy instrument.
As I have noted elsewhere, the recently enacted fiscal stimulus should boost the economy at a time when it is close to full employment and growing above trend.
It is hard to know with precision how the economy is likely to respond.
If unemployment continues to decline at the rate of the past year, it could reach levels not seen in several decades.
Historically, such episodes tended to see a risk of accelerating inflation in earlier decades or a risk of financial imbalances in more recent decades.
It is important to be attentive to the emergence of any imbalances, because we do not have much experience with pro-cyclical fiscal stimulus at a time when resource constraints are tightening and growth is above trend.
Despite elevated asset valuations, overall risks to the financial system remain moderate in no small part because important financial reforms have encouraged large banking institutions to build strong capital and liquidity buffers.
History suggests, however, that a booming economy can lead to a relaxation in lending standards and an attendant increase in risky debt levels.
At a time when valuations seem stretched and cyclical pressures are building, I would be reluctant to see our large banking institutions releasing the capital and liquidity buffers that they have built so effectively over the past few years, especially since credit growth and profitability in the U.S.
Of course, if cyclical pressures continue to build and financial vulnerabilities broaden, it may become appropriate to ask the largest banking organizations to build a countercyclical buffer of capital to fortify their resilience and protect against stress.
Alternatively, if there were to be a material adjustment to the calibration of the structural buffers held by the large banking institutions, it would be important to make a compensating adjustment to the countercyclical buffer in order to achieve the same overall resilience to financial vulnerabilities.
It is worth noting that some other jurisdictions have designed their countercyclical buffer requirement to be above zero roughly half of the time--spanning a greater range of economic conditions than in the United States.
structural buffers are on the stronger end of the range internationally, the U.S.
banking system is also among the healthiest and most competitive in the world.
Credit growth is robust, and banks are registering strong profitability relative to their international peers.
Our financial stability agenda seeks to reduce the likelihood and severity of financial crises.
In the wake of the 2007-09 financial crisis and recession, we learned important lessons about the critical necessity of monitoring emerging financial vulnerabilities in a systematic fashion and taking corresponding prudential, macroprudential, and countercyclical policies to build resilience.
We undertake systematic assessment of financial vulnerabilities as an important input into our policymaking processes--helping to calibrate the prudential, macroprudential, and countercyclical policies that are our first lines of defense, in addition to informing FOMC deliberations because of the important feedback loops between financial conditions and our dual-mandate goals.
This work is complemented by the efforts of our domestic and international partners through the Financial Stability Oversight Council and the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council here at home and through the Financial Stability Board and the International Monetary Fund internationally.
I am grateful to John Schindler of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
In this work agenda, the Federal Reserve cooperates closely with other regulators to facilitate joint responsibility for financial stability while respecting that each independent agency has its own specific statutory mandate and governing body.
In addition to cyclical vulnerabilities, structural vulnerabilities, such as those that arise from the complexity and interconnectedness of large financial institutions, also remain potential sources of risk to the financial system.
The Federal Reserve assesses structural vulnerabilities in support of its financial stability and supervision and regulation responsibilities.
For instance, cybersecurity is the subject of ongoing monitoring and policy efforts.
These statistics are for the 18 bank holding companies that participated in both the 2009 and 2017 stress tests.
The risk-based capital statistics for 2009 report tier 1 common equity, and for 2017 report Basel III common equity tier 1.
These statistics reflect the 18 advanced approaches bank holding companies subject to the standard LCR.i Return to text
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), "Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing," proposed rule (Docket No.
Over the years, our adverse scenarios, which are not designed to be the binding scenario for capital planning purposes, have featured large increases in Treasury yields across the maturity curve.
See the box "Developments Related to Financial Stability" in Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, February), pp.
For the most recent statement, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), "Federal Open Market Committee Reaffirms Its 'Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy,' " press release, January 31.
On April 5, 2018, a typo was corrected to change 19 to 18 in the following sentence in footnote 7: "These statistics reflect the 19 advanced approaches bank holding companies subject to the standard LCR." Return to text

The Roles of Consumer Protection and Small Business Access to Credit in Financial Inclusion
Thank you to John Bryant and Operation HOPE for inviting me today to open the HOPE Global Forums.1 I commend our hosts for bringing together such an impressive group of speakers and attendees, diverse in their perspectives, yet all of whom share the vital goal of advancing economic opportunity and inclusion.
Over the next few days, you will be discussing many issues relating to financial inclusion--such as housing, small businesses, workforce participation, and other topics--to which we at the Federal Reserve share a commitment, and that we view as critical to our mission.
Our economy is stronger when everyone has a chance to contribute fully and share in our national prosperity.
I'm particularly pleased to see on the conference agenda a number of sessions on issues to which we, at the Federal Reserve, devote considerable attention: access to credit and financial inclusion for consumers and small businesses.
Conversations like these are enormously important to understanding the challenges Americans face and why a multitude of voices and approaches are needed to address them.
In my remarks today, I'd like to focus on the consumer protection and credit accessibility aspects of financial inclusion, and some of the ways that the Federal Reserve promotes a fair and transparent consumer financial services marketplace.
In recent speeches, I have emphasized my view that we should aim for an effective safety and soundness regulatory approach that is as efficient, transparent, and simple as feasible.2 I consider these principles to apply equally to our consumer protection supervision program; that is, we should also strive to promote consumer protection with as much efficiency, transparency, and simplicity as possible.
Regulatory burden can make it harder for institutions to serve their customers and communities.
This is especially the case for community banks and minority depository institutions (or MDIs), which play an important role in serving the needs of their local communities, including historically underserved populations.
I'd also like to share some thoughts on an area to which I have devoted a good portion of my career: the importance of small business access to credit, which is a critical part of financial inclusion and a catalyst for economic growth in local communities.
In broad terms, financial inclusion means access to affordable financial products and services that meet the needs of individuals and businesses and that are delivered in a responsible and sustainable way.3 At the Federal Reserve, we recognize the influence that financial inclusion has on the broader economic performance of our country.4 Inclusion is essential to advancing the Federal Reserve's goal of promoting maximum employment, as well as supporting the stability of the financial system.
Likewise, we support and share your goal of ensuring a fair and transparent marketplace for financial products and services--including credit--that can provide a pathway toward economic prosperity for all Americans.
Overall, our economy is performing well, and unemployment is low.
However, many households and communities continue to face financial challenges.5 Consider that more than two-thirds of white households own their homes as compared to less than half of African Americans and Hispanics.6 And consider that all important human asset: education.
One-third of white adults have at least a bachelor's degree as compared to one in four African Americans and 17 percent of Hispanics.7 This matters because the advantages of a college degree for accumulating income and wealth are lifelong and inter-generational.8 We likewise see evidence of financial disparities in the Federal Reserve's Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking and Survey of Consumer Finances.9
And as a nation, we are deprived of the benefits of their potential contributions to the economy.
In the context of my earlier discussion of financial inclusion, federal consumer protection laws are critical to ensuring consumers are treated fairly when offered financial products and services.
These practices can close off opportunities and limit consumers' ability to improve their economic circumstances, including through access to homeownership and education.
The Federal Reserve's consumer compliance supervisory program reflects our commitment to promoting financial inclusion and ensuring that the financial institutions under our jurisdiction fully comply with applicable federal consumer protection laws and regulations.
Let me give two examples involving the Federal Trade Commission Act's prohibition against unfair or deceptive practices in products and services that will undoubtedly be familiar to the audience--student financial aid and mortgage lending.
In the last few years, the Federal Reserve has addressed deceptive practices in these areas through public enforcement actions that have collectively benefited hundreds of thousands of consumers and provided millions of dollars in restitution.
In the financial aid context, our actions required restitution for students who were not given full information about the potential fees and limitations associated with opening deposit accounts for their financial aid refunds.10 And in mortgage lending, our action required restitution by a bank that had given borrowers the option to pay an additional amount to purchase discount points to lower their mortgage interest rate, but that did not actually provide the reduced rate to many of those borrowers.11
For all state member banks, we enforce the Fair Housing Act, and for banks of $10 billion dollars or less in assets, we also enforce the Equal Credit Opportunity Act.
Our examiners evaluate fair lending risk at every consumer compliance exam.
While we find that the vast majority of our institutions comply with the fair lending laws, we are committed to identifying and remedying violations when they occur.
Pursuant to the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, if we determine that a bank has engaged in a pattern or practice of discrimination, we refer the matter to the U.S.
Federal Reserve referrals have resulted in DOJ public actions in critical areas, such as redlining and mortgage-pricing discrimination.
For example, in our redlining referrals, the Federal Reserve found that the banks treated majority-minority areas less favorably than non-minority ones, such as through lending patterns, marketing, and Community Reinvestment Act assessment-area delineations.
For our mortgage-pricing discrimination referrals, the Federal Reserve found that the banks charged higher prices to African American or Hispanic borrowers than it charged to non-Hispanic white borrowers and that the higher prices could not be explained by legitimate pricing criteria.12
Yet, we can achieve this goal and still reduce regulatory burden through a balanced program of tailored and risk-focused supervision.
Accordingly, we continue to seek opportunities to promote efficient, simple, and transparent supervision where possible, so that the institutions we supervise can focus on finding solutions that work for all consumers and communities.
In an effort to promote consumer compliance, our community bank supervisory program focuses our examinations on the areas of highest consumer risk.
This has improved the efficiency and effectiveness of our examinations and reduced regulatory burden for many community banks.
Banks and consumers benefit when supervision is timely and effective.
Put simply, our role as supervisors should not be to play "gotcha" with our banks, but to support their compliance efforts.
The Interagency Consumer Compliance Ratings System, published in November 2016, is an example of this approach.13 This guidance provides incentives for institutions to focus on managing their consumer compliance risks, preventing consumer harm, and helping to create a culture that identifies and corrects problems.
Another example of how we support our institutions is how we work with MDIs, which as I noted earlier, play an important role in serving the needs of their local communities.
We have dedicated Reserve Bank staff who are in frequent contact with MDI leadership.
Based on what we've learned in the course of this outreach, we have expanded our Partnership for Progress--a program for outreach and technical assistance to MDIs14--to include staff from our Community Development function, and we have enhanced our MDI-related programing.
This includes Consumer Compliance Outlook, a widely subscribed Federal Reserve System publication focused on consumer compliance issues, and its companion webinar series, Outlook Live.15 For example, in 2017, we sponsored an interagency webinar on fair lending supervision with almost 6,000 registrants, a substantial share of which were community banks.16
At the Federal Reserve, we view small business credit from several perspectives.
For the economy, small businesses need adequate and affordable credit in order to form, grow, and succeed; otherwise they may underperform, slowing growth and employment.
A well-functioning housing finance market is vital for small business owners who may draw upon the equity in their homes to fund their businesses.
Student loans may be needed to help fund the education that is important for both small business owners and their employees to boost profits and productivity.
And, short-term credit matters for day-to-day management of cash flow, while longer-term credit is essential for capital investments.
So, entrepreneurs--just like consumers--need access to a variety of credit sources.
The anecdotes I heard touched on three related trends we have been observing in the small business credit environment.
First, although lending standards have eased since the recession and the financial condition of businesses has improved, some small business credit needs, especially for the smallest of firms and minority small business owners, continue to go unmet.
According to a 2016 Small Business Credit Survey conducted by our 12 Federal Reserve Banks, some small businesses still face persistent credit gaps, even though they often seek credit in small amounts.
Of the firms that apply for credit, more than two-thirds apply for less than $100,000, with substantial numbers of these applying for less than $25,000.17 However, smaller firms often struggle to qualify for bank credit, and among firms that were denied, low credit scores and insufficient credit history were the most frequently cited reasons.
In addition, our survey suggests that some low-credit-risk minority- and women-owned firms are less likely than low-risk white-owned and male-owned firms to receive financing; and if they are approved, it is for less than the amount sought.18
Second, there have been shifts in the composition of commercial bank lending to small businesses.
This represents a change from 20 years ago when small businesses relied more on a relationship with local community banks for access to credit.
For loans under $100,000, small banks of less than $1 billion in assets now hold a 19 percent share, down from 60 percent two decades ago.
Loans entail high fixed costs that are roughly the same regardless of whether a loan is for $100,000 or $1 million, reducing the profitability of smaller-dollar loans.19 Our data suggest that the growing share of small business lending at larger banks may be partly due to their use of automated underwriting for credit cards.20 By providing credit cards, banks are expanding credit available to small businesses; however, some small business advocates note that this form of credit is generally more expensive and lacks the flexibility of other products.21 For example, personal or business credit cards may be suitable for purchasing supplies, but not for payroll.
In addition, this automated approach may be more "cookie cutter," meaning that firms that don't meet standard lending criteria may not qualify.22
For example, some of the large technology firms are providing credit, at a rapidly growing pace, to their built-in customer base of merchants.
I'm not surprised to see this important topic on your conference agenda.
The use of fintech to expand access to credit has great promise and also associated risks.
For example, online origination platforms and more sophisticated algorithms may enable credit to be underwritten and delivered in a manner that is still prudent but with greater efficiency, convenience, and lower processing costs.
At the same time, our interest is in ensuring that banks understand and manage their risks when introducing new technologies or partnering with fintech companies, and that consumers and small businesses remain protected.23 This is why the Federal Reserve has been engaged in a broad and multidisciplinary effort to develop a robust understanding of the technologies and activities in this space, in order to study fintech's opportunities and risks, and assess policy and supervisory implications.24
Fintech is also one of the factors driving calls for regulators to modernize the Community Reinvestment Act, or CRA, as technology changes how financial products and services are accessed.
As I'm sure most of you know, the CRA is an important law that recognizes banks' affirmative obligation to meet the credit needs of the communities they serve, including low- and moderate-income communities.
The CRA promotes financial inclusion by encouraging banks to extend mortgages, small business loans, and other types of credit as well as to provide investments and other services in communities where they take deposits, consistent with safe and sound banking operations.
The arrival of new financial technologies, along with significant industry consolidation and other structural changes, has changed the way that financial services are delivered to consumers and the ways in which banks lend in communities.
We continue to study these shifts, and share the common goal of improving the current supervisory and regulatory framework for CRA to further the statute's core objective of promoting access to credit and financial inclusion.
Finally, I'll note that we will continue to learn about issues concerning financial inclusion through our research, such as by collecting new data in our Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking and Survey of Consumer Finances that I mentioned earlier.
We also continue to convene experts and practitioners from industry, academia, and community-based organizations to help provide context on what we are seeing in the data, to identify emerging issues, and to consider where there may be data gaps and opportunities for additional research.
In addition to yielding important insights that inform our policymaking, we hope these efforts can support the conversations you are having at conferences like this one.
Making the economy work for the benefit of all Americans, including lower-income communities, is of the utmost importance.
The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
See, e.g., Lael Brainard, "Why Opportunity and Inclusion Matter to America's Economic Strength" (speech at the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, May 22, 2017); Janet L.
Yellen, "Perspectives on Inequality and Opportunity from the Survey of Consumer Finances" (speech at the Conference on Economic Opportunity and Inequality, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, MA, October 17, 2014); Ben S.
Bernanke, "The Level and Distribution of Economic Well-Being" (speech before the Greater Omaha Chamber of Commerce, Omaha, NE, February 6, 2007).
The Board's Monetary Policy Report (PDF) has included a discussion of the economic experiences of major demographic groups.
See, e.g., "Have the Gains of the Economic Expansion Been Widely Shared?" in Monetary Policy Report (Washington: Board of Governors, June 21, 2016), p.
Census Bureau, Current Population Survey, 2017 Annual Social and Economic Supplement, "Educational Attainment in the United States: 2017," December 14, 2017.
More information about recent referrals to the DOJ can be found in the Federal Reserve's annual report at www.federalreserve.gov/publications/2016-ar-consumer-and-community-affairs.htm#14890.
Federal Reserve System, "2017 Interagency Fair Lending Hot Topics," Outlook Live webinar series, November 16, 2017.
While there are many working definitions of "small," figures from the Small Business Credit Survey (SBCS) use firms with less than 500 employees as a proxy for small businesses.
Some 28 percent are seeking credit in amounts less than $25,000 and 42 percent reported seeking between $25,000 and $100,000.
According to special analyses of the Joint Federal Reserve Banks' Small Business Credit Survey, among low- credit-risk firms, 60 percent of minority firms that were approved received only partial funding, whereas 68 percent of low-risk, non-minority firms were approved for the full amount of financing requested.
Among low-credit-risk firms, 48 percent of women-owned firms received all of the financing requested, compared to 57 percent of men-owned firms.
Based on Federal Reserve analysis of FR-Y14 data for scored loans and cards (i.e., underwritten by owner's personal credit) for 2007 to 2016.
Record of Meeting (PDF), Community Advisory Council and the Board of Governors, May 26, 2017, p.
See Lael Brainard, "The Opportunities and Challenges of Fintech" (speech at the Conference on Financial Innovation at the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, DC, December 2, 2016).

I appreciate the invitation from the Money Marketeers to discuss the path ahead for our economy and monetary policy.1
Many of the forces that acted as headwinds to U.S.
growth and weighed on policy in previous years are generating tailwinds currently.
Today many economies around the world are experiencing synchronized growth, in contrast to the 2015­-16 period when important foreign economies experienced adverse shocks and anemic demand.
The International Monetary Fund revised up its outlook for the world economy in January, continuing a recent pattern of upward revisions, in contrast to a string of downward revisions in 2015 and 2016.2 Stronger economies abroad should increase demand for America's exports and boost the foreign earnings of U.S.
The upward revisions to the foreign economic outlook are also pulling forward expectations of monetary policy tightening abroad and contributing to an appreciation of foreign currencies and increases in U.S.
By contrast, foreign currencies weakened in the earlier period, pushing the dollar higher and U.S.
In recent quarters, the combination of higher oil prices and robust global demand has been providing strong support to business investment--in contrast to the sharp pullback from 2015 to 2016.
Financial conditions are currently supportive of economic growth despite the recent choppiness in financial markets and some tightening since the beginning of the year.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago's National Financial Conditions Index provides a useful summary statistic.4 According to this measure, financial conditions tightened significantly from the middle of 2014 to early 2016.
The most notable tailwind is the shift in America's fiscal policy stance from restraint to substantial stimulus in an economy close to full employment.
In the earlier period, the economy had just weathered a challenging adjustment to a sharp withdrawal of fiscal support.
Today, from a position near full employment, the economy is poised to absorb $1-1/2 trillion in personal and corporate tax cuts and a $300 billion increase in federal spending.
Estimates suggest December's tax legislation could boost the growth rate of real gross domestic product (GDP) as much as 1/2 percentage point this year and next.5 On top of that, the recently agreed-to budget deal is likely to raise federal spending by around 0.4 percent of GDP in each of the next two years.6
Although the economy is currently around full employment and has been expanding at an above-trend pace, inflation has remained subdued for quite some time.
Over the past year, overall PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation was 1.7 percent, and core PCE inflation was 1.5 percent--not very different from the average level of core inflation over the past five years.
The persistence of subdued inflation, despite an unemployment rate that has moved below most estimates of its natural rate, suggests some risk that underlying inflation may have softened.
While transitory factors no doubt played a role in last year's step-down in core PCE inflation, various empirical analyses conclude that persistent factors are at play in the stubbornly low level of core inflation.
According to a variety of measures, underlying inflation--the slow-moving trend that exerts a pull on wage and price setting--may be running below levels that are consistent with the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent inflation objective.7 For example, some survey measures of longer-run inflation expectations are currently lower than they were before the financial crisis, as are most estimates based on statistical filters.
Inflation compensation has moved up recently, but is still running somewhat below levels that prevailed before the crisis.
Thus, it is important for monetary policy to ensure that underlying inflation is re-anchored firmly at 2 percent.
At the same time, it is important for monetary policy to sustain full employment.
It is difficult to know with precision how much slack remains in the labor market.
If the unemployment rate were to continue to fall in the coming year at the same pace as in the past couple of years, it would reach levels not seen since the late 1960s.
If substantially more workers could be drawn into the labor force, it would be possible for the labor market to firm notably further without generating imbalances.
But it is an open question as to what portion of the prime-age Americans who are out of the labor force may prove responsive to tight labor market conditions because declining labor force participation among prime-age workers predates the crisis, especially for men.
In one encouraging development, the strong labor market has pulled some discouraged workers back into the labor force and into productive employment over the past few years.
Although last year we faced a disconnect between the continued strengthening in the labor market and the step-down in inflation, mounting tailwinds at a time of full employment and above-trend growth tip the balance of considerations in my view.
With greater confidence in achieving the inflation target, continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate are likely to be appropriate.
Although experience in other countries suggests it can prove difficult to raise an underlying inflation trend that has been running below policymakers' target for several years, stronger tailwinds may help re-anchor inflation expectations at the symmetric 2 percent objective.
Of course, it is conceivable we could see a mild, temporary overshoot of the inflation target over the medium term.
If such a mild, temporary overshoot were to occur, it would likely be consistent with the symmetry of the FOMC's target and could help nudge underlying inflation back to our target.8 Recent research has highlighted the downside risks to inflation and to longer-run inflation expectations that are posed by the effective lower bound on nominal interest rates, and it suggests the importance of ensuring underlying inflation does not slip below target in today's new normal.9
If the unemployment rate continues to decline on the current trajectory, it could fall to levels that have been rarely seen over the past five decades.
Historically, such episodes have tended to see elevated risks of imbalances, whether in the form of high inflation in earlier decades or of financial imbalances in recent decades.
One of the striking features of the current recovery has been the absence of an acceleration in inflation as the unemployment rate has declined, a development that is consistent with a flat Phillips curve.10 Although wage gains have seen some recent improvements, they continue to fall short of the pace seen before the financial crisis.11
However, we do not have extensive experience with an economy at very low unemployment rates and cannot be sure how it might evolve.
In particular, we will want to remain attentive to the risk of financial imbalances.
While asset valuations appear to be elevated, overall risks to the financial system remain moderate because household borrowing is moderate, risks associated with liquidity and maturity transformation have declined, and, importantly, the banking system appears to be well capitalized.12 History suggests, however, that a booming economy can lead to a relaxation in lending standards, and the attendant excessive borrowing can complicate the task of monetary policy.
What do these considerations imply for the path of monetary policy? Continued gradual increases in the federal funds rate are likely to remain appropriate to ensure inflation rises sustainably to our target and to sustain full employment, keeping in mind that interest rate normalization is well under way and balance sheet runoff is set to reach its steady-state pace later this year.13 Of course, we should be ready to adjust the path of policy in either direction if developments turn out differently than expected.
Phillips Curve: Back to the '60s? (PDF)" Policy Brief PB16-1.
"FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, June 14.
"Federal Open Market Committee reaffirms its "Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy," press release, January 31.
"Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California, December 1.
"The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Global Affairs, Chicago, September 12.
"Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5.
"Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research," FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23.
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"The Risk-Adjusted Monetary Policy Rule," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-061.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"The Dog That Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Was It Just Sleeping? (PDF)" chapter 3 in World Economic Outlook: Hopes, Realities, Risks.
I am grateful to John Roberts of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance in preparing this text.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
See various issues of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) World Economic Outlook and World Economic Outlook (WEO) Updates.
The National Financial Conditions Index is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago's website at https://www.chicagofed.org/publications/nfci/index.
Other indexes of financial conditions, such as the indexes published by the Federal Reserve Banks of Kansas City and St.
For example, the IMF 2018 WEO Updates (see note 2) estimates that the tax cut legislation will raise the level of U.S.
As laid out in Board of Governors (2017), the caps determining the degree of reinvestment of maturing securities in the System Open Market Account are increasing gradually.
The caps on the monthly runoff in the portfolio are expected to reach their maximum levels of $30 billion for Treasury securities and $20 billion for agency debt and mortgage-backed securities later this year.
The actual pace of runoff will vary, however, depending on the volume of securities maturing in any given month.

The Federal Reserve’s Regulatory Agenda for Foreign Banking Organizations: What Lies Ahead for Enhanced Prudential Standards and the Volcker Rule
At the Institute of International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington, D.C.
Thank you very much to the Institute of International Bankers for inviting me to speak here today.
Among my first areas of focus when I was a very young lawyer starting out in my career well over 30 years ago was providing advice to foreign banks and financial firms operating in the United States, and I learned then just how integral, essential, and welcome a part your firms play in our domestic financial sector.
firms serve as an important source of credit to U.S.
households and businesses and contribute materially to the strength and liquidity of U.S.
I view that as an important part of my job.
So today I want to share my perspective on the appropriate regulatory environment for foreign banks operating in the United States, as well as some thoughts on specific elements of that regime.
Before doing that though, we should take stock of the pre-crisis history of foreign firms operating in the United States.
First, the financial crisis revealed that in times of stress, international banking firms with large and complex local operations can contribute to instability in those local markets and can require extraordinary support from local authorities.
Second, a number of foreign financial institutions expanded the size and complexity of their U.S.
operations at a rousing pace and scale prior to the crisis, and we did not adjust our local regulatory and supervisory approaches to address the increased risk associated with this expansion.
banks during the crisis mirrored that of their similarly sized domestic counterparts, underscoring a need for increased resiliency of both domestic firms and the U.S.
To bolster that resiliency, the environment for foreign banks operating in the United States underwent a number of changes.
While there are important differences, those changes for foreign firms broadly parallel many of the changes instituted for domestic firms.
My Federal Reserve colleagues and I have termed these the core post-crisis regulatory reforms: capital, liquidity, stress testing, and resolution planning.1 Of course, the obvious and most prominent difference for foreign firms--as attendees of this conference certainly know--was the introduction of the intermediate holding company (IHC) structure, to which the post-crisis regulatory reforms apply.
If none of the regulatory measures implemented up to now were capable of improvement, this would be the first project of this scale and complexity conducted that had been done exactly right the first pass through.
In particular, as I have said elsewhere, we should be looking to see where we can achieve our regulatory objectives in ways that maintain our measures' effectiveness, but improve their efficiency, transparency, and simplicity.
As part of that effort, we will consider additional tailoring and flexibility of our regulations in light of their impact on foreign banking organizations (FBOs) based on lessons learned over the past several years.
To illustrate how I am thinking about these issues, I want to focus in my remarks today on two specific regulatory examples.
In implementing enhanced prudential standards for foreign banks with a large U.S.
presence, we sought to ensure that firms hold sufficient local capital and liquidity--and have a risk management infrastructure--that is commensurate with the risks in their U.S.
operations.2 And in general, that approach is meeting many of the broad goals the Federal Reserve set out to achieve.
operations are less fragmented, maintain local capital and liquidity buffers that align to the size and riskiness of their U.S.
Our current approach aligns with other jurisdictions that host a large and complex foreign bank presence.
banking firms have long been subject to Basel-based standards imposed by the European Union and the United Kingdom as host regulators.
In addition, European regulators are contemplating a holding company structure for the local operations of foreign banks to reduce fragmentation and ensure effective local supervision, similar in many ways to Federal Reserve rules.
In adopting the enhanced prudential standards, however, the Board has acknowledged both the uniqueness of FBOs--as the U.S.
operations are a small part of a larger firm--and the diversity of foreign bank operations in the United States.
The Board contemplated from the outset that circumstances may require application of the rule's requirements to be adjusted in light of an individual firm's structure or risk profile.
The Board has exercised this authority in the past, and I want to stress that we will continue to provide flexibility where appropriate to accommodate these differences.
For instance, in implementing enhanced risk management standards, we have focused on outcomes--a strong control environment for foreign bank operations in the United States--while providing some flexibility in how those outcomes are achieved.
We have allowed the global risk committee to serve as the risk committee for the U.S.
branches but no IHC, the Board has acknowledged the challenges associated with the location of the risk committee.
holding companies as well as managerial committees located in the United States, provided that the global board provided appropriate oversight.3 We are committed to continuing this outcomes-focused approach and to refining it where needed.
Further, we recognize that effective stress testing regimes can take many different forms, specifically when interpreting the home-country stress testing requirements of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.
The Board has acknowledged, for example, that a foreign bank's internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) may meet the minimum standards, provided that the firm's ICAAP is on a consolidated basis and reviewed by the home country regulator.
In addition, while we believe that the IHC requirement serves a valuable role in ensuring consistency of regulation across U.S.
operations of an FBO, the Board has reserved authority to approve multiple IHCs if circumstances warrant based on the FBO's activities, scope of operations, structure, home country regulatory framework, or similar considerations.
For example, the Board's enhanced prudential standards rule contemplates allowing multiple IHCs in cases where home country legal requirements inhibit the combination of certain bank and nonbank operations.
In practice, and in several instances, the Board has permitted a foreign bank to maintain certain U.S.
subsidiaries outside of its IHC, so long as the foreign bank did not have practical control over that subsidiary.4 In addition, the Board recently approved an application by a foreign bank for a second IHC.
Part of our rationale for approving the dual IHC structure was the enhancement of recovery and resolution options of the global firm.
In granting the exception, the Board applied enhanced prudential standards to the two IHCs in the same manner that would apply to a single IHC, to maintain a level playing field and align incentives for the safe and sound operation of both IHCs.
This approach allows us more flexibility in addressing firm-specific structure needs, while maintaining the goals of the enhanced prudential standards more generally.
We will continue to consider future applications based on the merits of the case.
Finally, to the extent that foreign banks have decided to reduce the scope of their U.S.
We are committed to tailoring our regulatory and supervisory regimes to align with the risk posed by financial institutions to the U.S.
We are also continuing to evaluate whether our rules are sensitive to changes in the risk profile of banking organizations.
We want our rules both to increase in stringency as firms' risks grow and, just as important, to decrease in stringency when firms have actively reduced their risk profiles.
The fundamental premise of the Volcker rule is simple: banks with access to the federal safety net--Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insurance and the Federal Reserve discount window--should not engage in risky, speculative trading for their own account.
Taking that premise as a given, we have to ask how to improve the framework of the implementing regulation to make it more workable and less burdensome in practice from both a compliance and supervisory perspective.
As one example of specifics, among many, the statute and implementing regulation's approach to defining "market making-related activities" rests on a number of complex requirements that are difficult or impossible to verify objectively in real time.
As a result, banks spend far too much time and energy contemplating whether particular transactions or positions are consistent with the Volcker rule.
This has a very positive consequence: I have heard nothing but support from all of my regulatory colleagues for the proposition that the regulation is overly complex and would benefit from streamlining and simplifying to improve its workability in practice.
We are actively working with our fellow regulators in seeking ways to further tailor and to reduce burden, particularly for firms that do not have large trading operations and do not engage in the sorts of activities that may give rise to proprietary trading.
We also appreciate the broad extraterritorial impact of the rule in its current form for foreign banks' operations outside of the United States.
To that end, we have, with the full cooperation of all five Volcker regulatory agencies, picked back up the process that was begun last fall to engage in a rulemaking process subject to the Administrative Procedures Act and develop a proposal for public comment that would make material changes to the Volcker rule regulations.
In that process we will take account of our own experience with the regulations since implementation, and we also want to take account of the views of market participants and other interested parties with views on the Volcker rule, including what is working and what is not.
For example, a number of my current and former Federal Reserve Board colleagues have expressed support for Congress providing an exemption from the Volcker rule for community banks, which is something I also support.
5 Short of a statutory exemption, we can only do our best to mitigate burden on community banks that generally do not engage in the types of activities the Volcker rule was intended to cover.6 Statutory changes likely would make our work of streamlining more straightforward and complete, but we have a fair bit that we can accomplish even absent such changes.
It should not be a guessing game or require hours of legal analysis of complex banking and securities regulations to determine if a particular entity is a covered fund.
It should not happen--although it has happened--that our supervised firms come to us and ask questions about whether a particular derivative trade is subject to the rule, and we cannot give them our own answer or a consistent answer across the five responsible agencies.
Again, a good example is the exemption for market making-related activities, which is one of the key exemptions from the prohibition on proprietary trading.
The rule contains a gaggle of complex regulatory requirements, but the statute contains merely one--that the market making-related activities are designed not to exceed the reasonably expected near-term demands of clients, customers, or counterparties, otherwise known as RENT'D.7 We are considering different ways to use a clearer test for RENT'D.
We want banks to be able to engage in market making and provide liquidity to financial markets with less fasting and prayer about their compliance with the Volcker rule.
With respect to foreign banks, there are at least a few places where we would like to revisit the application of the final rule based on concerns raised by market participants and others over the past four years of implementation.
In particular, there are certain foreign funds--funds that are organized outside the United States by foreign banks in foreign jurisdictions and offered solely to foreign investors--that are subject to the Volcker rule due to Bank Holding Company Act control principles.
Last summer, the banking agencies, in consultation with the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, issued guidance that effectively stayed enforcement of the Volcker rule to these foreign funds in light of the technical and complex issues they raise.8 I expect we would continue this period of stay while we continue to consider these important issues.
The statute also contains exemptions for FBOs to allow foreign banks to continue trading and engaging in covered fund activities solely outside the United States.
The regulation again has a complex series of requirements that a foreign bank must meet to make use of these exemptions.
We have heard from a number of foreign banks that complying with these requirements is unworkable in practice, and we are considering ways to address this impracticality.
One possibility that has been suggested by market participants is a simple approach that focuses on the risk of the booking location.
As a final but no less important matter, we are considering broad revisions to the Volcker rule compliance regime.
We would like Volcker rule compliance to be similar to compliance in other areas of our supervisory regime.
As I noted earlier, we appreciate the broad extraterritorial impact of the rule in its current form on foreign banks' operations outside of the United States.
Accordingly, we will be looking for ways to reduce the compliance burden of the Volcker rule for foreign banks with limited U.S.
As I have described previously, the Federal Reserve is actively reviewing post-crisis financial reforms in an effort to better understand which reforms are working well and which ones can be improved to reduce regulatory burden and improve the efficiency, transparency, and simplicity of the regulatory framework without compromising a safe and sound financial system.
In that effort, we recognize the importance of foreign banks to the U.S.
economy and have a strong interest in ensuring our regulations are appropriately tailored to their U.S.
Our goal is to maintain a regulatory framework that helps to ensure a strong and stable banking system in an efficient manner that does not result in excessively burdensome costs to the banking industry or the economy as a whole.
The areas I have discussed today are important components of the exercise of improving our regulations as they apply to FBOs, and are part of a larger overall agenda to critically evaluate and improve our regulations to promote financial stability while fostering the conditions for solid economic activity.
Some of these exercises will require more effort and time than others, but each one of them is a high priority for us at the Federal Reserve.
intermediate holding company structure provided for consistent application of capital, liquidity, and other prudential requirements and consistent supervision across the U.S.
See 12 USC 5365; Enhanced Prudential Standards for Bank Holding Companies and Foreign Banking Organizations, 79 Fed.
assets of $50 billion or more to maintain its risk committee as a committee of the board of directors of its U.S.
intermediate holding company (as applicable) or as a committee or the global board of directors (or equivalent thereof)); see also General Counsel opinion letters to Cooperatieve Rabobank U.A.
and Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group, Inc., each dated October 19, 2016, related to the risk committee requirement.
For instance, if the subsidiary was wholly owned by a joint venture between the foreign bank and the third party.
Powell, "Regulation and Supervision of Community Banks," (speech at the Annual Community Bankers Conference, New York, NY, May 14, 2015).
("I believe community banks should not face significant burdens from complying with these requirements, so I support raising the asset threshold for both the Volcker rule and incentive compensation rules, perhaps to $10 billion.
In the event where the actions of a community bank might raise concerns in either of these areas, that could be addressed through our normal examination process."); see also Daniel K.
("The third problem, also in the statute, is that the Volcker rule applies to a much broader group of banks than is necessary to achieve its purpose.
As I have said before, the concerns underlying the Volcker rule are simply not an issue at community banks.") Return to text
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "The Volcker Rule: Community Bank Applicability (PDF)," news release.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, "Statement regarding Treatment of Certain Foreign Funds under the Rules Implementing Section 13 of the Bank Holding Company Act (PDF)," July 21, 2017.

I am pleased to speak with you all about our financial regulatory system: both the broad principles that have been directing my approach to evaluating the regulatory system, as well as cybersecurity, which is a topic of great import to financial system participants and their regulators.
We have spent the past decade building out and standing up the post-crisis regulatory regime, and as a result we have made critical gains.
We have robust capital and liquidity levels, an effective stress testing regime, and improved resolvability of our largest firms.
Federal Reserve Board staff members continue the review that I have previously outlined.
The goal is to consider the effect of past regulatory initiatives on the resiliency of our financial system, on credit availability and economic growth, and more broadly, their costs and benefits.
Let me now turn from regulation to supervision, and more specifically, to the topic of cybersecurity, which continues to be a high priority for the Federal Reserve.
The Federal Reserve is committed to strategies that will result in measureable enhancements to the cyber resiliency of the financial sector.
While we know that successful cyber attacks are often connected to poor basic information technology hygiene, and firms must continue to devote resources to these basics, we also know that attackers always work to be a step ahead, and we need to prepare for cyber events.
As the Federal Reserve thinks about its financial stability mandate, this concern will be a particular focus.
The Federal Reserve also focuses on the sharing of threat information and collaborates with a number of partners toward protective mechanisms.
We work with other domestic agencies as well as international authorities, and we have partnerships between the public and private sectors to introduce and participate in programs that combat the increasingly frequent and sophisticated cyber threats.
We also participate in community and industry outreach forums and actively share threat intelligence with sector partners including the Financial Services Information Sharing and Analysis Center (FS-ISAC).
And we encourage financial institutions to work collectively through arrangements such as FS-ISAC so that threat information can be shared promptly and effectively.
The Federal Reserve has been working with, and will continue to work with, other financial regulatory agencies on harmonizing cyber risk-management standards and regulatory expectations across the financial services sector.
Specifically, we are focused on aligning our expectations with existing best practices, such as the National Institute of Standards and Technology's Cybersecurity Framework, and identifying opportunities to further coordinate cyber risk supervisory activities for firms subject to the authority of multiple regulators.
We support industry efforts to improve harmonization across the sector, which are complementary to achieving our regulatory safety and soundness goals.
The Federal Reserve continues to work toward improving both post-crisis regulation and our approach to cybersecurity.
And while many of the areas will require additional work and may not have fast results, the Federal Reserve is committed to getting it right, and I look forward to those efforts.

At "Promoting Sustained Growth: Policy Tensions and Risks" 34th Annual NABE Economic Policy Conference, Washington, D.C.
Thank you for the opportunity to take part in this important and influential conference.1 I would like to discuss my view of current economic conditions in the United States, provide an assessment of the sustainability of the current momentum in the economy, and then conclude with a look at some of the potential implications that would follow from a sustained upturn in economic growth.
Along many dimensions, it has been quite some time since the economic environment has looked as favorable as it does now.
Real gross domestic product (GDP) growth through the final three quarters of 2017 averaged almost 3 percent, a considerable step-up over the 2 percent average annual pace recorded over the previous eight years.
The sustainability of the recent upturn in growth will depend importantly on whether some of the factors that have been holding back growth for the past decade diminish, including weak investment and productivity.
On balance, I am cautious, but I am also optimistic enough to believe that the factors that have been holding back growth need not be permanent and could turn, even fairly rapidly.
What would be the likely consequences if growth were to shift up on a sustained basis? Here I think it will be important to consider and observe the form that higher growth takes.
In particular, it matters whether growth is embodied in a sustained increase in the productive capacity of the economy or, instead, is primarily the product of a boost to aggregate demand.
The split between the two will likely have important implications for inflation and thus for how the stance of monetary policy will respond to higher growth.
The Federal Reserve will, as always, seek to achieve its dual mandate of maximum employment and stable prices.
I will start with an assessment of current economic conditions.
In my view, the economy appears to be in a good spot right now.
This favorable position is particularly evident in the labor market.
After peaking at 10 percent in October 2009, the unemployment rate has declined to 4.1 percent, its lowest level since the 1960s outside of a brief period from 1999 to 2000.
With the unemployment rate below most estimates of its natural rate, wages appear to have accelerated a little of late after a period of relatively muted increases, and I expect a further modest step-up in the pace of wage gains.
Another welcome development has been a break in recent years in the two-decade-long trend decline in the labor force participation rate.
The robust job market has likely spilled over to other aspects of the economy.
Consumer confidence has returned to pre-crisis levels, which, together with solid income gains and rising household wealth, has supported strong growth in consumption expenditures.
Real expenditures on capital equipment increased at a double-digit pace in the second half of last year, providing early hope that the investment drought that has weighed on growth in recent years might finally be breaking.
The recent upturn in growth has not been confined to the United States.
In its latest projection, the International Monetary Fund (IMF) forecasts global growth to run close to 4 percent in 2018, the fastest pace since the immediate post-crisis rebound in 2010 and 2011.2 Even more notable is that the IMF has revised up global growth in its recent projections.
Inflation has run at a low and relatively stable rate throughout the crisis and the recovery.
Recently, the low level of inflation has attracted considerable attention, as it continues to run on the soft side notwithstanding the apparent tightness of the labor market.
Headline PCE (personal consumption expenditures) prices increased 1.7 percent in the 12 months ending in December, a few tenths of 1 percentage point below the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) 2 percent longer-run inflation objective.
That inflation has remained low even as activity has picked up and the labor market has tightened has led a number of commentators to question the relevance of the Phillips curve analytical framework that ties inflation to the strength of the economy.
Indeed, I think it is likely that tightness in labor markets will eventually show up in wages and prices.
I tend to agree with the view that the recent softness of inflation mostly reflects idiosyncratic and transitory factors, and I expect inflation to move back to 2 percent over the next year or so.
Overall, I would characterize the recent weakness of inflation as something that should be expected to fade rather than as an enduring mystery that necessitates a change in our framework for assessing inflation.
To review, all in all, the state of the economy is good.
The question now is how persistent this step-up in growth will prove to be.
In the FOMC's most recent Summary of Economic Projections, released in December, growth was expected to remain fairly solid in 2018 before moving down toward a longer-run rate of 1-3/4 percent.3 I do not view this forecast as particularly optimistic, but it is as reasonable as any other if one conjectures that the factors that have held back growth in recent years will remain in effect.
But now that the economy is coming off several quarters of relatively robust growth, I would like to examine the appropriate level of confidence in this conjecture and, in particular, identify what we might look for if, in actuality, some of the factors that have held back growth over the past decade begin to dissipate.
Before doing so, let me first quickly review some of the most frequently cited explanations for the slow pace of growth in the post-crisis period.
Why Has Growth Been So Slow through Much of the Post-crisis Period?
Why has growth been so slow over much of the past decade? I will break down the explanations into two broad categories: those related to the lingering after-effects of the crisis--for example, increased uncertainty and precaution--and those that are more structural and less clearly linked to the crisis, such as demographics and low productivity growth.
It is certainly true--as pointed out most notably by Reinhart and Rogoff in 2009--that recoveries from severe financial crises can be very prolonged and painful.4 In the aftermath of the most recent crisis, an increase in consumer caution, along with a tightening of credit conditions, helped boost saving, leading to a necessary deleveraging of households, but at the expense of consumption growth.
growth has been repeated shocks to the global economy, sometimes amplified by vulnerabilities growing out of the crisis.
The effects of a number of these shocks have spilled over to the United States, including those stemming from the euro-area debt crisis as well as occasional concerns about the strength and durability of emerging market growth, especially in China.
These foreign developments contributed to a 15 percent appreciation of the broad dollar since mid-2014, which, along with weak foreign economic activity, weighed on U.S.
Concern over the strength of foreign demand also contributed to a steep decline in the price of oil at around the same time.
Historically, lower oil prices have been a positive for U.S.
In a development that predates the crisis, relatively flat labor input, as measured by hours worked, has weighed on growth.
In part, the sluggishness of labor input just reflects long-term demographic trends as baby boomers age and retire.5
Perhaps most important in explaining the growth slowdown has been the lackluster increase of productivity in recent years.
Labor productivity has averaged an annual growth rate of only 3/4 percent since 2011, far below the 2-1/4 percent pace prevalent over the two decades leading into the financial crisis.
Why has productivity growth been so anemic? A number of theories have been raised, but there does not appear to be a clear answer--and certainly not a consensus answer.
One school of thought is that productivity growth has not slowed down much at all; rather, new technologies and products have made economic output harder to measure.6 It is not difficult to think of technological developments that have had a deep and pervasive effect on our daily lives (smartphone apps, for example) but perhaps in a manner that is difficult to describe in the existing vocabulary of economic statistics.
In a break with the easy dichotomy I offered earlier, others tie the slowdown in productivity growth more tightly to developments related to the aftermath of the financial crisis.
Slow investment growth--which, as already mentioned, had prevailed until recently--damps the contribution of new capital to worker productivity.
It could also be that new investment is a necessary step for the spread of new technologies, especially if technology is embodied in capital equipment.
Spending on research and development, an important input for technological advances, has been fairly subdued following the crisis.
Also, the aftermath of the crisis has been associated with a decrease in business dynamism--for example, the rate at which new start-up firms are being created has declined.9
Having laid out the standard explanations for the slow pace of growth, I will now speculate on what a shift to a higher growth path might look like and what I think we may want to watch for.
After subtracting from growth over much of the period from 2011 onward, the impetus from fiscal policy has turned distinctly positive with the passage of recent tax and budget legislation.10 Fiscal policy is likely to impart considerable momentum to growth over the next couple of years not only by increasing demand, but also by boosting, to some degree, the potential capacity of the economy.
Of course, while stimulative in the near run, deficit spending--and the associated large and growing federal government debt--can have negative effects on the economy over the longer term, in part by claiming a larger share of the nation's savings, driving up long-term interest rates, and crowding out productive private investment.
Given long-standing demographic trends, it would seem a heavy lift to expect labor force growth to contribute much to a pickup in GDP growth.
However, it is encouraging that the downward movement in labor force participation has recently been on hiatus, a development that could possibly be prolonged by the recent tax legislation--which could, for example, give some workers an incentive to remain in or enter the workforce.
As I mentioned, the recent data on investment have been encouraging, with a noticeable pickup in capital equipment spending.
While the tax act is multifaceted and complex, lower corporate tax rates and other incentives will also likely boost investment and increase the capital stock.
Though the quarterly numbers are volatile and should be treated cautiously, the nearly 1 percent decline in labor productivity recorded in the fourth quarter of 2017 would imply that a productivity turnaround is not yet upon us.
There are those who argue a more optimistic take on the prospects for technology developments to boost productivity growth.11 For example, a number of new technologies, including artificial intelligence and genetic sequencing, appear on the cusp of breaking out, with widespread effects on economic activity.12
Also, it might be true that productivity growth will be nudged higher by the pace of economic activity.
Tight labor markets might induce firms to invest more in robotics and other labor-saving technology.
With global growth picking up steam, the external environment is more favorable for U.S.
In 2017, for example, the contribution of real exports to growth picked up markedly following two years in which exports provided no support to growth at all.
Again, I think it is too soon to call a turning point in the long-run growth prospects of the economy, notwithstanding some encouraging signs that I have highlighted.
One consequence might be that a sustained increase in growth could be associated with an increase in the natural rate of interest, a concept that has developed a prominent position in the lexicon of central banking in recent years.
One conception of the natural rate of interest is the rate of interest necessary to sustain stable prices and full employment.
In the eyes of many commentators, that inflation has remained so low through the post-crisis period even as interest rates have fallen to levels that historically would have been very stimulative to the economy suggests that the natural rate has fallen.
Why might the natural rate have fallen? There are a number of compelling narratives, including low productivity growth, demographic trends, increased uncertainty, and a higher demand for precautionary saving.
If these narratives sound familiar, it is because they are more or less the same set of explanations put forward as reasons for the slow pace of growth in recent years.
Thus, a lessening of any of these factors, such as a sustained increase in the pace of productivity growth, would likely push up the natural rate of interest as well as GDP growth.
What are the consequences of a higher natural rate of interest? As the natural rate moves up, any given level of the policy rate would be more accommodative, so the policy rate would also have to move up to continue the gradual removal of policy accommodation.
It is important to point out that this higher policy path would be motivated by sustained stronger growth and improved economic conditions, not a greater desire to slow the economy.
Could there be a benefit from a higher natural rate of interest? In addition to its value in signaling that the economy is doing better, a higher rate could facilitate the conduct of monetary policy.
A lower natural rate of interest can complicate the operation of conventional monetary policy.
Since it is difficult to cut nominal interest rates below zero, conventional monetary policy is more likely to be constrained at low levels of the natural interest rate.
The higher the natural interest rate, the more space central banks have to cut policy rates in response to an economic downturn, easing the conduct of conventional policy.
So where does this discussion leave us? My assessment of the current state of the economy is optimistic.
I also think there is a real possibility that some of the factors that have been holding back growth in recent years could shift, moving the economy onto a higher growth trajectory.
However, given that conditions could shift, it is fair to ask what a higher growth path might mean.
As I discussed, it could mean a higher natural interest rate, which would increase the amount of accommodation provided at a given level of the Federal Reserve's policy interest rate.
It goes without saying, but always bears repeating, that at the Federal Reserve we are very focused on meeting our dual mandate of maximum sustainable employment and price stability.
In assessing the effect of higher growth on monetary policy, I will be carefully watching how that growth aligns with our dual mandate.
It might seem reasonable to assume that faster growth would lead to firmer inflation.
For one, the degree to which growth spurs inflation is likely to be determined by the underlying factors that are prompting the increase in growth.
A demand-led increase can be expected to have a greater positive effect on prices than a step-up in the pace of potential growth.
Growth led by an increase in the economy's productive capacity, either through increased labor force participation or higher productivity growth, is likely to impart less upward pressure on prices.
I will be carefully watching indicators of economic activity and inflation and assessing the degree to which activity appears to be pushing up against the constraints of the economy, as opposed to being a reflection of the expansion of those constraints and the growth of the potential output of the economy.
At our January meeting, the FOMC decided to maintain its target range for the federal funds rate between 1-1/4 and 1-1/2 percent.13 In this range, monetary policy remains accommodative.
With my current economic outlook, I anticipate that further gradual increases in the policy rate will be appropriate to both sustain a healthy labor market and stabilize inflation around our 2 percent objective.
Of course, as I mentioned, I will keep a close eye on economic indicators--and their implications for the outlook for inflation and real activity--and adjust my views on the appropriate monetary policy accordingly.
"Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp.
"Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem? (PDF)" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"Declining Business Dynamism: What We Know and the Way Forward," American Economic Review, vol.
The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
The most recent Summary of Economic Projections, an addendum to the minutes of the December 2017 FOMC meeting, is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/fomcminutes20171213ep.htm.
Reinhart and Rogoff (2009) document the lasting effect that downturns related to a financial crisis can have on economic growth.

At "10 Years after the Global Financial Crisis: How Has the World Economy Changed and Where Will It Go?" 26th International Financial Symposium sponsored by the Institute for International Monetary Affairs, Tokyo, Japan
I am very happy to be participating in this symposium on taking stock of the global economy a decade after the Global Financial Crisis, and I thank Hiroshi Watanabe for the invitation.1 I have been asked to provide an overview of the U.S.
economy since the advent of the crisis in no longer than 10 minutes, so I could either talk very quickly or focus my comments on more recent developments, perhaps throwing in a bit of historical context when appropriate.
economy appears to be performing very well and, certainly, is in the best shape that it has been in since the crisis and, by many metrics, since well before the crisis.
Recent volatility in equity markets is a reminder that asset prices can move rapidly and unexpectedly.
However, it is my assessment that the underlying fundamentals of the U.S.
economy are sound and much improved relative to earlier in the decade.
One easy and important place to see that improvement is in the labor market.
After peaking at 10 percent in October 2009, the unemployment rate fell rather steadily to 4.1 percent in January--the lowest level, outside of a period from 1999 to 2000, since the 1960s.
Job gains in recent months have continued at a pace that would be pushing the unemployment rate even lower if the labor participation rate had not stabilized in recent years, a welcome development and a sign that the strength of the labor market is pulling in or retaining workers who might otherwise be on the sidelines.
Broader measures of labor market slack--for example, those that include individuals who are out of the labor force but say they want a job as well as those working with a part-time job but who would like to work full time--have largely returned to pre-crisis levels.
While the labor market has shown steady improvement over the past decade, the post-crisis performance of gross domestic product (GDP) growth has been more disappointing, averaging just 2 percent per year over the past seven years.
However, beginning with the second quarter of last year, growth has shown some momentum.
Over the past three quarters of 2017, real GDP increased at an average rate of almost 3 percent.
While headline growth stepped back a bit in the fourth quarter, largely on account of increased drag from higher imports and lower inventories, underlying final private domestic demand--which is a better indicator of economic momentum--grew at its fastest pace in more than three years.
Recent survey data reveal a growing sense of economic optimism.
In 2017, investment in capital equipment increased at the fastest pace since 2011, accelerating through the year to a double-digit rate in the second half.
It might be early, but it is possible that the investment drought that has afflicted the U.S.
economy for the past five years may finally be breaking.
The tax and fiscal packages passed in recent months could help sustain the economy's momentum in part by increasing demand, and also possibly by boosting the potential capacity of the economy by encouraging investment and supporting labor force participation.
While the recent performance of the economy has been solid relative to much of the pre-crisis period, one area that continues to lag is productivity growth, a condition that has been common across the advanced economies.
Beginning in 2011, the annual growth rate of labor productivity has averaged only 3/4 percent, compared with an average 2-1/4 percent pace in the two decades leading up to the financial crisis.
Why productivity growth has been so weak defies easy explanation.
In addition, some have argued that there has been a decline in business dynamism following the crisis; others do not link the slowdown to the crisis but rather to an exogenous slowdown in the rate of technological progress; and still others believe that productivity growth has not really slowed much at all and, instead, is just not being measured correctly in the official statistics.
Regardless, given the importance of productivity growth for the long-run potential of the economy and living standards, it is vitally important that policymakers pursue policies aimed at boosting the growth rate of productivity.
Another aspect of the economy that has attracted a lot of attention is the apparent low level of inflation despite the tightness in labor markets.
After assessing the recent data, my take is that the current shortfall in inflation from target as most likely due to transitory factors that will fade through 2018, pushing inflation back up to target.
Against this economic backdrop, with a strong labor market and likely only temporary softness in inflation, I view it as appropriate that monetary policy should continue to be gradually normalized.
An important component of this normalization was initiated in October, when we started to gradually scale back our reinvestment of proceeds from maturing Treasury securities and principal payments from agency securities.
With the balance sheet normalization plan set to remain on autopilot, barring a material deterioration in the economic outlook, the federal funds rate remains our primary tool for adjusting the stance of monetary policy.
At our January meeting, the Federal Open Market Committee decided to maintain its target range for the federal funds rate between 1-1/4 percent and 1-1/2 percent.2 In this range, monetary policy remains accommodative.
I anticipate further gradual increases in the policy rate will be appropriate to both sustain a healthy labor market and stabilize inflation around our 2 percent objective.
Of course, it should go without saying that I will keep a close eye on economic indicators--and their implications for the outlook for inflation and real activity‑‑and adjust my views on appropriate monetary policy accordingly.
The Federal Reserve and our colleagues at other agencies have now spent the better part of the past decade building out and standing up the post-crisis regulatory regime.
The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2018), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, January 31, https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20180131a.htm.

The Congress has assigned the Federal Reserve the goals of stable prices and maximum employment.
Price stability means that businesses and households can make important decisions without concern for high or volatile inflation.
Maximum employment means that those who want a job either have one or can find one reasonably quickly.
We also have important responsibilities for the stability of the financial system and for the regulation and supervision of financial institutions, including our largest banks.
These are awesome responsibilities, and the Congress has wisely entrusted us with an important degree of independence so that we can pursue our monetary policy goals without concern for short-term political pressures.
Over the past 25 years, the Fed has been a leader among central banks in improving transparency.
We will continue to pursue ways to improve transparency both in monetary policy and in regulation.
When I joined the Board of Governors in 2012, unemployment was 8.2 percent.
Since then, monetary policy has continued to support a full recovery in labor markets and a return to our inflation target; we have made great progress in moving much closer to those statutory objectives.
In addition, the financial system is incomparably stronger and safer, with much higher capital and liquidity, better risk management, and other improvements.
Much credit for these results should go to Chairman Bernanke and Chair Yellen.
We approach every issue through a rigorous evaluation of the facts, theory, empirical analysis and relevant research.
We consider a range of external and internal views; our unique institutional structure, with a Board of Governors in Washington and 12 Reserve Banks around the country, ensures that we will have a diversity of perspectives at all times.
While the challenges we face are always evolving, the Fed's approach will remain the same.
Today, the global economy is recovering strongly for the first time in a decade.
We are in the process of gradually normalizing both interest rate policy and our balance sheet with a view to extending the recovery and sustaining the pursuit of our objectives.
I believe that the way we approach our work, the strong values we hold, and the dedication to public service I see throughout the Federal Reserve have been the keys to our success.
As Chairman, I will uphold these values and do my very best to further our pursuit of something we all seek--an economy that works for all Americans.
On Monday, February 5, 2018, Jerome Powell officially took the oath of office as Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (for more information, see the Board's press release available at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/other20180205a.htm).

These are still the early days of my tenure at the Federal Reserve--last weekend marked my first three months as the first Vice Chairman for Supervision.
In those three months, people have had a lot of questions for me, but the most frequently asked question has been: What's next? Today I hope to give you some insights into how I am approaching the work of evaluating and improving the post-crisis regulatory regime and to outline some specific areas that are emerging as areas of focus early in my tenure.
Some of those areas are closer to being ready for action, while others are topics that I believe are important and would benefit from more attention and discussion.
Before I delve into specifics, let me say a few words about the principles that are guiding my approach to evaluating changes to the current regime.
Core aspects of that project have resulted in critical gains to our financial system: higher and better quality capital, an innovative stress testing regime, new liquidity regulation, and improvements in the resolvability of large firms.
We undoubtedly have a stronger and more resilient financial system due in significant part to the gains from those core reforms.
These achievements are consistent with the responsibility of the Federal Reserve to be a steward of a safe financial system, and with the goal of maintaining the ability of banks to lend through the business cycle.
That said, the Federal Reserve and our colleagues at other agencies have now spent the better part of the past decade building out and standing up the post-crisis regulatory regime.
At this point, we have completed the bulk of the work of post-crisis regulation, with an important exception being the U.S.
implementation of the recently concluded Basel III "end game" agreement on bank capital standards at the Basel Committee.
By efficiency I mean the degree to which the net cost of regulation--whether in reduced economic growth or in increased frictions in the financial system--is outweighed by the benefits of the regulation.
In other words, if we have a choice between two methods of equal effectiveness in achieving a goal, we should strive to choose the one that is less burdensome for both the system and regulators.
It can also mean simpler examination procedures for bank supervisors, or less intrusive examinations for well managed firms.
In our approach to assessing post-crisis regulation, we should consider all of these ways of improving efficiency.
When I arrived at the Federal Reserve, the early stages of reflection on how to improve the cost-benefit balance of post-crisis regulation had already begun, mainly in a few narrow areas of focus.
My colleague and Chairman-nominee Jay Powell spoke about five of these areas last summer when he served as the Board's oversight governor for supervision and regulation: small bank capital simplification, burden reduction in resolution planning, enhancements to stress testing, leverage ratio recalibration, and Volcker rule simplification.2 I wholeheartedly support these initiatives, and I am pleased that some of them have progressed even in the months since the summer.
The banking agencies recently proposed changes to the capital rules for smaller firms, consistent with last year's Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act report, which is a positive step toward meaningful burden relief for smaller banks.3 The Federal Reserve, along with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, extended the upcoming resolution planning cycles for the eight most systemic domestic banking firms and for foreign banks with limited U.S.
operations in order to allow for more time between submissions.4 I believe we should continue to improve the resolution planning process in light of the substantial progress made by firms over the past few years, including a permanent extension of submission cycles from annual to once every two years and reduced burden for banking firms with less significant systemic footprints.
And, most recently, the Federal Reserve released a package of proposed enhancements to the transparency of our stress testing program, which is currently out for comment.5 The progress you have seen in those areas represents constructive early steps.
Leverage ratio recalibration also is among the Federal Reserve's highest-priority, near-term initiatives.
Volcker rule reform remains a priority in the Federal Reserve's regulatory efforts.
In my early days as the Vice Chairman for Supervision, I asked our staff to conduct a comprehensive review of the regulations in the core areas of reform that I outlined earlier--capital, stress testing, liquidity, and resolution.
The objective is to consider the effect of those regulatory frameworks on resiliency and resolvability of the financial system, on credit availability and economic growth, and more broadly to evaluate their costs and benefits.
I will start with the issue of tailoring supervision and regulation to the size, systemic footprint, risk profile, and business model of banking firms.
The Federal Reserve has devoted considerable energy in its post-crisis regulatory work to incorporate the tailoring concept in its regulation and supervision across the spectrum of small, medium, and large firms.
A recent example of this approach is our late 2017 proposal to simplify capital requirements for small- and medium-sized banking firms.
In my view, there is further work for the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies to do on the tailoring front.
As my colleagues and I have said before, the character of our regulation should match the character of the risk at the institution.
Accordingly, we should also be looking at additional opportunities for more tailoring for larger, non-Global Systemically Important Banks, or non-G-SIBs.
Irrespective of where the legislative efforts land, I believe we at the Federal Reserve have the responsibility to ensure that we do further tailoring for the institutions that remain subject to our rules to ensure that regulation matches the risk of the firm.
Take for example large non-G-SIBs whose failure would not individually pose a risk to U.S.
Even without financial stability implications, the distress or failure of these firms still could harm the U.S.
economy by, for example, significantly disrupting the flow of credit to households and businesses.
banking system ought to be subject to regulations that are generally stricter than those that apply to small banking firms, but that are also meaningfully less strict than those that apply to the G-SIBs.
The Board has effected this sort of G-SIB versus non-G-SIB tailoring among large banks in many areas of the regulatory framework.
Most notably, each of the risk-based capital requirements, leverage requirements, stress testing requirements, and total loss-absorbing capacity (TLAC) requirements is calibrated substantially more strictly for G-SIBs than for large non-G-SIBs.
Liquidity regulation, for example, does not have a G-SIB versus non-G-SIB gradation.
In particular, the full liquidity coverage ratio (LCR) requirement and internal stress testing requirements of enhanced prudential standards apply to large, non-G-SIB banks in the same way that they apply to G-SIB banks.
I believe it is time to take concrete steps toward calibrating liquidity requirements differently for large, non-G-SIBs than for G-SIBs.
And I see prospects for further liquidity tailoring in that the content and frequency of LCR reporting are the same for the range of firms currently subject to the modified LCR as they are for the large non-G-SIBs that are subject to the full LCR.
We should also explore opportunities to apply additional tailoring for these firms in other areas, such as single counterparty credit limits and resolution planning requirements.
These thresholds are significant not only for identifying which banking firms are subject to the advanced approaches risk-based capital requirements, but also for identifying which firms are subject to various other Basel Committee standards, such as the supplementary leverage ratio, the countercyclical capital buffer, and the LCR.
The metrics used to identify internationally active firms--$250 billion in total assets or $10 billion in on-balance-sheet foreign exposures--were formulated well over a decade ago, were the result of a defensible but not ineluctable analysis, and have not been refined since then.
There are different ways to count the number of loss absorbency constraints that our large banking firms face--which is perhaps in itself an indication of a surfeit of complexity if we can't be perfectly sure of how to count them--but the number I come up with is 24 total requirements in the framework.
Candidates for simplification include: elimination of the advanced approaches risk-based capital requirements; one or more ratios in stress testing; and some simplification of our TLAC rule.
I am not the first Federal Reserve governor to mention some of these possibilities, and we should put them back on the table in the context of a more holistic discussion of streamlining these requirements.
Let me be clear, however, that while I am advocating a simplification of large bank loss absorbency requirements, I am not advocating an enervation of the regulatory capital regime applicable to large banking firms.
Although not a post-crisis regulation, the Board's complex and occasionally opaque framework for making determinations of control under the Bank Holding Company Act (BHC Act) is another area that is ripe for re-examination through the lenses of efficiency, transparency, and simplicity.
As you know, a determination of control under the BHC Act is significant because even remote entities in a controlled group can be subject to the BHC Act's restrictions on activities and a host of other regulatory requirements.
The process can be burdensome and time-consuming both for the requester and Federal Reserve staff.
Finally, as I mentioned earlier, an enhanced stress testing transparency package was released for public comment last month.
I personally believe that our stress testing disclosures can go further.
I appreciate the risks to the financial system of the industry converging on the Federal Reserve's stress testing model too completely, so I am hesitant to support complete disclosure of our models for that reason.
However, I believe that the disclosure we have provided does not go far enough to provide visibility into the supervisory models that often deliver a firm's binding capital constraint.
It is important in any proposal to receive comments, and I can say that I and my colleagues on the Board will be paying particularly close attention to your comments on how we might improve this current proposal.
To conclude, I hope that these remarks give you a sense of our approach to analyzing and improving post-crisis regulation.
As I mentioned earlier, the areas of core reform--capital, liquidity, stress testing, and resolution--have produced a stronger and more resilient system and should be preserved.
I look forward to engaging with you and the public more broadly as I help to chart a course for the important work ahead.
The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Powell, "Relationship Between Regulation and Economic Growth," (testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Agencies propose simplifying regulatory capital rules," news release, September 27, 2017.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Agencies extend next resolution plan filing deadline for certain domestic and foreign banks," news release, September 28, 2017.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Board requests comment on package of proposals that would increase the transparency of its stress testing program," news release, December 7, 2017.

At "Leading the Way: A Workforce Development Video Campaign" awards ceremony hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and Pathways in Technology Early College High Schools in the Greater Rochester Area, Rochester, N.Y.
I would like to thank the staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York for inviting me to attend this awards ceremony.1 As many of you may already know, the Leading the Way campaign is a joint effort between the Federal Reserve Bank and the P-TECH2 schools of the Greater Rochester area.
It is wonderful to be part of an event that celebrates collaboration between educational institutions, local government, the Federal Reserve, and employers as they work together to provide appropriate training for young workers to fill local jobs needs.
I have just come from a meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).
The FOMC is one of the main policymaking committees of the Federal Reserve System.
Our main job on the FOMC is to set interest rates to achieve the maximum level of employment in the country and sustain inflation at a moderate level.
The nation's unemployment rate is currently around 4.1 percent, which is a relatively low level by historical standards.
Moreover, not only is the national unemployment rate low, so are unemployment rates for young people and members of ethnic and racial groups that have traditionally faced greater challenges in the labor market.
In the past few years, the job market has gotten so strong that many of these people have come off the sidelines--and many are now back at work.
The education and health-care sectors continue to be the main drivers of job growth.
And, the local community colleges have partnered with local employers to align their curriculums with the employers' job openings, to increase workers' connections to jobs, and to become a resource for regional job information.
By any measure, the market for younger workers today looks much better than it did in the years just after the Great Recession, when unemployment rates for teenagers were above 20 percent.3
In fact, firms are turning more and more to programs like P-TECH to help them find and train the workers they need.
The Federal Reserve Bank of New York is one of the facilitators of the Leading the Way campaign.
The Federal Reserve System has a long-standing interest in understanding labor market dynamics and promoting workforce development opportunities.
Programs like this help workers prepare for jobs and help firms invest in workforce development.
Together, these efforts help make the economy more productive and help us achieve our goal of maximum employment.
In addition to the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's efforts, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston is learning about labor markets in small industrial cities through their Working Cities Challenge and the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas has focused on the importance of infrastructure including broadband for economic inclusion.
The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta has been a leader within the Federal Reserve System in establishing the Investing in America's Workforce Initiative, an effort across the Federal Reserve System to reframe training expenditures as investments in human capital rather than costs.
In October, Atlanta established the Center for Workforce and Economic Opportunity to focus on employment policies and labor market issues that affect low- and moderate-income individuals.
The System also recently hosted a national conference in Austin to promote the importance of investing in America's workforce.4
Since 2013, the Federal Reserve Board has been administering the Survey of Young Workers to learn more about work experiences and future prospects for 18-to-30-year-olds nationwide.
As a first example, the survey findings highlight the important correlation between postsecondary education and labor market outcomes.
Second, responses to the survey underscore the importance of young workers receiving appropriate information that enables them to select an educational program that provides better labor market outcomes.
Finally, the survey found that steady employment is very important to young workers.
In 2015, young adults had a strong preference for steady employment (62 percent) over higher pay (36 percent).
In conclusion, I am proud that the Federal Reserve is contributing to the efforts of the P-TECH program in the Rochester area and I look forward to the video presentations we will have shortly.
I also want to congratulate all of you for being part of a 21st century education program that will help connect you to pathways of opportunity and help enable you to make important contributions to the vitality of your community.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
See Lael Brainard, "Coming of Age in the Great Recession," speech given to the Federal Reserve's conference on "Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy," April 2, 2015.
For the Atlanta Fed's Center for Workforce and Economic Opportunity, see https://www.frbatlanta.org/cweo.aspx.

At the 2017 Financial Stability and Fintech Conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, the Office of Financial Research, and the University of Maryland's Robert H.
It is a pleasure to be with you today to talk about financial stability and fintech.
History, because the room was constructed just after the Civil War.
Finance, because it was designed to be the Treasury's bank and was originally used to conduct daily banking and payment transactions with other banks and the general public.
Of course the functionality of this room has changed over the decades as the financial system landscape has evolved, and today we are holding a conference here to discuss financial innovation.
So to carry through the theme of today's topic, one might call Jay the innovator on payments issues at the Federal Reserve, as he has spoken extensively on the subject for many years.
New technologies have brought tremendous, positive change to our lives, raising productivity and living standards and contributing to economic growth.
Not surprisingly, both the banking industry and technology firms have also been seeking innovations in financial services that mirror and complement changes that have been made in other industries.
Innovation is coming to finance with changes to consumer lending, financial advice, and retail payments, to name a few.
The Federal Reserve, itself, is engaged in a multiyear effort to address challenges and opportunities in the current payment system.
During my experience in the realm of private equity, I had a chance to interact with many new firms in these areas.
In my new role as Vice Chairman for Supervision at the Federal Reserve, I see innovation as something that can and should be fostered, but of course I must also scrutinize these innovations from a different perspective.
That is to say, it is appropriate not only to evaluate the potential of innovations to improve on existing services, but also to judge their ramifications for the safety and soundness of the institutions we supervise and for financial stability--the topic of this conference.
Although many of these technologies are still nascent, it is important to have an eye on the potential financial stability implications both in the short- and long-run.
With the Cash Room's perspective on history and daily financial operations in mind, I would like to concentrate my remarks on the U.S.
payment system, which is a critical foundation on which financial transactions and the conduct of business take place.
New technologies are being proposed that could alter the design of our payment system.
Today, I will talk about the necessary trust and confidence that the system requires, the tension between the need for financial stability and the need to innovate, and the challenges that digital currencies, in particular, present relative to the current system.
These considerations highlight the need for a prudent approach to innovation in payment systems.
In simple terms, there is an asset that functions as money that can be transferred by households and businesses to buy goods and services, which, along with their financial institutions, make up the bulk of the financial network.
Today, the predominant forms of money used in payment systems are Federal Reserve notes and reserve balances as well as transaction balances at depository institutions.
Payment systems also require a technical network to hold and transfer money.
Regulated banking institutions provide deposit money to the public and are a main source of trust for these systems.
Transfers of balances on the books of these institutions are at the center of the public's transactions, with the Federal Reserve Banks playing a central, supporting role in interbank clearing and settlement for the most critical systems.
A great amount of resources and effort goes into the networks that make the overall payment system safe, efficient, and resilient.
It is fair to say that the general public places a great deal of trust in the components of the overall system to safeguard their money and operate as planned every day, and that trust is necessary for the system to work.
From the perspective of financial stability, if the safety and integrity of the institutions and assets at the heart of a system erode or the transfer operations are not dependable, then the necessary trust and confidence that the system requires to work may quickly cease to function as needed.
With a steady diet of news about the effect of electronic networks, personal devices, apps, and more on U.S.
industries, many question the effect of these technologies on the payment system.
I think we should recognize that there can be a tension between the need for financial stability in the overall payment system and the need to innovate to keep up with the demands of modern technology and lifestyles.
By definition innovation means doing something new, which usually involves taking risk in furtherance of some gain.
From an analytical perspective, payment systems typically increase in value as more people use a system and the more attractive it becomes to others.
In addition, there is an inverse relationship between the volume of users of a system and the cost of production--more users lower the cost of production.
However, the effect of reducing technological barriers for financial stability is not clearly positive or negative.
For example, on the one hand, new market participants attracted by lower barriers to entry may introduce new and unknown risks in the payment system.
On the other hand, new market participants may relieve the concentration of activity in a limited number of players.
Thus, the potential tension between innovation and stability can be more difficult to manage in the case of payment systems as compared to other industries that are less affected by these hurdles.
One sensible approach to risk management would emphasize "starting small" and taking small risks.
But unless a payment system grows a fairly large network of users in a reasonable time, it is unlikely to achieve the scope and scale it needs to be successful.
Conversely, if a system attempts to start on a large scale and is successful, there will surely be questions about resilience in adversity, particularly if cutting-edge technologies and methods are used to handle people's money.
The essential problem is how to achieve scale and manage financial and technical risk at the same time.
Not surprisingly, because striking the right balance takes time, genuine innovation in payment systems over history has often been measured in decades, not years.
This cautious approach to using new technology appears to reflect the weight of responsibility the financial industry bears for protecting both their customers and their reputations.
Continued monitoring of developments is in order, and time will tell how these new technologies--and others--can contribute to a safe and secure payment system and broader financial system.
The Federal Reserve has been actively monitoring these developments and will continue to do so.2
But when we examine the assets at the center of digital currency systems, I think we should begin to think clearly about the long-term properties we seek for large-scale payment networks and systems used by the general public.
payment system, digital currencies are a niche product that sometimes garners large headlines.
But from the standpoint of analysis, the "currency" or asset at the center of some of these systems is not backed by other secure assets, has no intrinsic value, is not the liability of a regulated banking institution, and in leading cases, is not the liability of any institution at all.
Indeed, how to treat and define this new asset is complicated.3
While these digital currencies may not pose major concerns at their current levels of use, more serious financial stability issues may result if they achieve wide-scale usage.
Risk management can act as a mitigant, but if the central asset in a payment system cannot be predictably redeemed for the U.S.
dollar at a stable exchange rate in times of adversity, the resulting price risk and potential liquidity and credit risk pose a large challenge for the system.
During times of crisis, the demand for liquidity can increase significantly, including the demand for the central asset used in settling payments.
Even private-sector banks and certainly non-banks can have a hard time meeting large-scale demands for extra liquidity at the very time when their balance sheets may be in question.
Moreover, this inability to meet the demand for extra liquidity can have spillover effects to other areas of the financial system.
Earlier in our history, the United States frequently witnessed bank runs that severely disrupted financial and economic activity, an example of what can happen when people lose faith in a payment system.
In response, Congress ultimately introduced both a central bank and deposit insurance programs to help regulate fluctuations in the supply of liquidity in order to keep prices stable.
Without the backing of a central bank asset and institutional support, it is not clear how a private digital currency at the center of a large-scale payment system would behave, or whether the payment system would be able to function, in times of stress.
Given that privately developed digital currencies may raise important financial stability issues tied to the value of the asset, some have argued that central banks should begin to issue their own digital currency as a 21st century analogue to paper currency.
I would urge caution, particularly for countries like the United States with highly developed banking systems and ongoing robust demand for physical cash.
As a practical matter, I believe that consideration of a central-bank-issued digital currency to the general public would require extensive reviews and consultations about legal issues, as well as a long list of risk issues, including the potential deployment of unproven technology, money laundering, cybersecurity, and privacy to name a few.
The effect of all this would significantly divert our focus from work to improve or establish new private-sector retail payment systems based on existing institutions.
The prospect of a government-sponsored digital currency might even derail private-sector plans to enhance the payment services provided to their customers, thereby significantly disrupting the financial networks that exist today in ways that could create instability.
For example, if payment activity radically shifted from using deposits at financial institutions to using central-bank-issued digital currency, deposits could significantly shrink and potentially disrupt financial institutions' ability to make loans that spur economic activity.
That said, research into digital currency issues, including highly liquid and secure limited-purpose digital currencies for use as a settlement asset for wholesale payment systems, should continue.
For the United States, the alternative to privately issued digital currency is not necessarily a publicly issued digital currency.
Instead, the near-term alternative is to build on the trusted foundations of the existing payment system and work to improve private-sector payment services.
Today, many banks offer around-the-clock internet-based access to accounts as well as mobile banking and payment capabilities.
Many banks typically allow real-time or near real-time transfers of funds among their own customer base.
What does not yet exist in the United States is the sort of ubiquitous, real-time payment system that would allow banks and their customers to make transfers and settlements of funds across the banking system instantly, conveniently, and securely all the time.
As my colleague at the Board, Jay Powell, recently discussed at a conference in New York, the Federal Reserve has been working with the banking industry and a wide range of other payment system stakeholders to better understand the consequences of this state of affairs and support efforts to expand the available options through our payment system improvement initiative.4 For example, based on recommendations from the industry, the Federal Reserve is currently studying potential improvements in its settlement services--a traditional core function of a central bank--that could address the future needs of a ubiquitous real-time retail payments environment.
Building on our existing banking system also makes sense from a financial stability perspective.
Federally insured and supervised institutions are the core of our current payment system and largely address the potential financial stability problem of relying on payment systems with unbacked and unregulated digital currencies at their heart.
But leveraging our existing banking system does not suggest that there is no room for new or emerging institutions and technologies.
Indeed, there are a number of promising avenues that would allow the innovations that appear to be of the greatest interest to households and business--attributes like instant payment capabilities and around-the-clock operations--to be offered using a variety of existing and new technologies without requiring significant tradeoffs in safety and resiliency.
To conclude, our financial stability requires that the payment system be reliable and dependable so that the public can trust it.
As a result, there can be a tension between innovation and the need for financial stability in the overall payment system.
Innovation must therefore account for the effects that it has on both the financial and technology networks that make up our payment system.
The innovation that is beginning to flow from the development of digital currencies--and other technologies--will likely have a long-run effect on the technical networks and the business processes used in the payment system and the wider financial system.
Privately developed digital currencies as currently configured would raise concerns about the effect on financial stability if they take on more prominence in the payments and overall financial system.
Central bank digital currencies are also not immune to a large range of risks and could even adversely affect financial stability.
As such, central banks should tread cautiously as they contemplate issuing them.
Working cooperatively, private-sector participants and central banks can incorporate innovation that may be able to strike the right balance of improving the technical networks without adversely generating financial stability concerns.
I am optimistic that the Federal Reserve's work with the payments industry will facilitate a future with a safe and more efficient payment system.
See Financial Stability Board, Financial Stability Implications from FinTech: Supervisory and Regulatory Issues that Merit Authorities' Attention (PDF), June 27, 2017.
See David Mills, Kathy Wang, Brendan Malone, Anjana Ravi, Jeff Marquardt, Clinton Chen, Anton Badev, Timothy Brezinski, Linda Fahy, Kimberley Liao, Vanessa Kargenian, Max Ellithorpe, Wendy Ng, and Maria Baird, "Distributed Ledger Technology in Payments, Clearing, and Settlement (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-095 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2016).
The Securities and Exchange Commission has published guidance on the treatment of digital currencies under the Securities Exchange Act (www.sec.gov/news/press-release/2017-131).
And the Financial Crimes Enforcement Network has published guidance on the treatment of digital currencies under the Bank Secrecy Act (www.fincen.gov/resources/statutes-regulations/guidance/application-fincens-regulations-persons-administering).
Powell, "Financial Innovation: A World in Transition" (speech delivered at the 41st Annual Central Banking Seminar, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, October 18, 2017).

The new generation of fintech tools offers the potential to help consumers manage their increasingly complicated financial lives, but also poses risks that will need to be managed as the marketplace matures.1
As consumers start to rely on financial autopilots, however, it is important that they remain in the driver's seat and have a good handle on what is happening under the hood.
If these issues can be appropriately addressed, the new fintech capabilities have enormous potential to deliver analytically grounded financial services and simplified choices, tailored to the consumers' needs and preferences, and accessible via their smartphones.2
When the first major "credit card," the Diner's Club Card, was introduced in 1949, consumers could only use the cardboard card at restaurants and, importantly, only if they paid the entire amount due each month.3 Today, the average cardholder has about four credit cards, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York estimates that American consumers collectively carry $785 billion in credit card debt.4
When signing up for a credit card, consumers face a bewildering array of choices.
Half of consumers report that they select new cards based on reward programs, weighing "cash back" offers against "points" with their credit card provider that may convert into airline or hotel "miles," which may have varying values depending on how they are redeemed.5 In some cases, rewards may apply to specific spending categories that rotate by quarter and require that consumers re-register each term, and the rewards may expire or be forfeited under complicated terms.6
Let's take the example of zero percent interest credit card promotions.
A consumer may choose a zero percent interest credit card promotion and expect to pay no interest on balances during a promotional period, after which any balances are assessed at a higher rate of interest going forward.
But if a consumer instead chooses a zero percent interest private-label credit card with deferred interest and has a positive balance when the promotional period expires, interest could be retroactively assessed for the full time they held a balance during the promotional period.7 Even sophisticated consumers could be excused for confusing these products.
For instance, one recent study of the credit card market found that the average length of agreements for products offered to subprime consumers was 70 percent longer than agreements for other products.8
The complexity multiplies when we go beyond credit cards and consider other dimensions of consumers' financial lives.9 The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation has found that nearly a quarter of the Americans that don't maintain bank accounts are concerned that bank fees are too unpredictable.10 Even though mortgage debt is over two-thirds of household debt, nearly half of consumers don't comparison shop before taking out a mortgage.11 Student loans now make up 11 percent of total household debt, more than twice its share in 2008.12 Over 11 percent of student debt is more than 90 days delinquent or in default--and researchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York estimate that this figure may understate the problem by as much as half.13
In the Federal Reserve Board's annual Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking (SHED), more than half of respondents reported that their spending exceeded their income in the prior year.15 Indeed, 44 percent of SHED respondents reported that they could not cover an emergency expense costing $400 without selling something or borrowing money.16
These tools build on important advances in our understanding of consumer financial behavior and the applications, or "app," ecosystem.
The 2016 Federal Reserve Survey of Consumer and Mobile Financial Services (SCMF) found that 87 percent of the U.S.
A developer that wants to incorporate artificial intelligence into their financial management app can access off-the-shelf models of cloud computing providers, potentially getting to market faster than by taking the traditional route of finding training data and building out models in-house from scratch.
Further, similar to cloud computing providers, data aggregators are also beginning to provide off-the-shelf product stacks on their own platforms.29 This means that developers can quickly and easily incorporate product features, such as predicting creditworthiness, determining how much a consumer can save each month, or creating alerts for potential overdraft charges.
Let's again consider the example of deferred interest credit cards.
It turns out only a small minority of consumers miss the deadlines for repaying promotional balances and are charged retroactive interest payments, and they typically have deep subprime scores.31 Similarly, for consumers that opt into overdraft products on their checking accounts, 8 percent of consumers pay 75 percent of the fees.32 Up until now, it has been hard for consumers to understand those odds and objectively assess whether they are likely to be in the group of customers that will face challenges with a particular financial product.
The convergence of smartphone ubiquity, cloud computing, data aggregation, and off-the-shelf AI products offer the potential to make tailored financial advice scalable.
Some fintech advisors ask consumers to provide access to their bank accounts, retirement accounts, college savings accounts, and other investment platforms in order to enable a fintech advisor to offer a consumer a single, near complete picture of his balances and cash flows across different institutions.
To begin with, one internet adage is that if a product is free, "you are the product."34 In this vein, fintech advisors frequently offer free services to consumers and earn their revenue from the credit cards and other financial products that they recommend through lead generation.
But for those services that do act as lead generators, there are important considerations about whether and how best to communicate information to the consumer about the nature of the recommendations being made.
For instance, according to some reports, fintech advisors can make between $100 and $700 in lead generation fees for every customer that signs up for a credit card they recommend.35
A product may be at the top of the advisor's recommendations because the sponsoring company has paid the advisor to list it at the top, or the sponsoring company may pay the fintech assistant a high fee, contingent upon the consumer signing up for the product.
Alternatively, a fintech advisor may change the order of the loan offers or credit cards based on the likelihood that the consumer will be approved.
There appears to be a wide variety of practices regarding the prominence and placement of advertising and other disclosures relative to the advice and recommendations such firms provide.
Often, when a consumer signs up with a fintech advisor or other fintech app, they are asked to log into their bank account in order to link the fintech app with their bank account data.
In reviewing apps' enrollment processes, it appears that consumers are often shown log-in screens featuring bank logos and branding, prompting consumers to enter their online banking logins and passwords.
When the consumer logs on, he or she is often not interfacing with a banks' computer systems, but rather, providing the bank account login and password to a data aggregator that provides services to the fintech app.
In many cases, the data aggregator may store the password and login and then use those credentials to periodically log into the consumer's bank account and copy available data, ranging from transaction data, to account numbers, to personally identifiable information.
Some banks and data aggregators have agreed to work together to facilitate the ability to share data with outside developers in authorized ways.
For instance, when a consumer deletes a fintech app from his or her phone, it is not clear this would guarantee that a data aggregator would delete the consumer's bank login and password, nor discontinue accessing transaction information.
If a consumer severs the data access, for instance by changing banks or bank account passwords, it is also not clear how he or she can instruct the data aggregator to delete the information that has already been collected.
Traditionally, under the Electronic Funds Transfer Act and its implementing Regulation E, consumers have had protections to mitigate their losses in the event of erroneous or fraudulent transactions that would otherwise impact their credit and debit cards, such as data breaches.
So what can be done to make sure consumers have the requisite information and control to remain squarely in the driver's seat? Establishing and implementing new norms is in the shared interest of all of the participants in the fintech stack.
For instance, in the case of credit cards, mortgages, and many other products, it is often banks or parties closely affiliated with banks that pay fees to fintech advisors to generate leads for their products, pursuant to a contract.
Through these contractual relationships with fintech advisors, banks have considerable influence in the lead generation relationship, including through provisions describing how a sponsored product should be described or displayed.
Banks have a stake in ensuring that their vendors and third-party service providers act appropriately, that consumers are protected and treated fairly, and that the banks' reputations aren't exposed to unnecessary risk.44 Likewise, some of the leading speech-only financial products are currently credit card and bank products.45 Accordingly, banks have incentives to invest in innovating the way they disclose information to consumers, as they also invest in new ways of interacting with them.
As for consumers' relationships with data aggregators, there's an increasing recognition that consumers need better information about the terms of their relationships with aggregators, more control over what is shared, and the ability to terminate the relationship.46 We have spoken to data aggregators who recognize the importance of finding solutions to many of the complex issues involved with the important work of unlocking the potential of the banking stack to developers.
Responsibility for establishing appropriate norms in the data aggregation space should be shared, with banks, data aggregators, fintech developers, consumers, and regulators all having a role.47 Banks and data aggregators are negotiating new relationships to determine how they can work together to provide consumers access to their data, while also ensuring that the process is secure and leaves consumers in the driver's seat.48 In many cases, banks themselves were often the original customers of data aggregators, and many continue to use these services.
According to public filings, more than half of the 20 largest banks are customers of data aggregators.49 The banks have an opportunity as customers of data aggregation services to ensure that the terms of data provision protect consumers' data and handle it appropriately.
Regulators also recognize that there may be opportunities to provide more clarity about how the expectations about third-party risk management would work in this sector, as well as other areas experiencing significant technological change.
We recognize the importance of working together and the potential to draw upon existing policies, norms, and principles from other spaces.
Consumers, as well as the market as a whole, will benefit if regulators coordinate to provide more unified messages and support the development of standards that serve as a natural extension of the common-sense norms that consumers have come to expect in other areas of the commercial internet.
The combination of technologies that put vast computing power, rich data sets, and artificial intelligence onto simple smartphone apps together with important research into consumer financial behaviors has great potential to help consumers navigate their complex financial lives more effectively, but there are also important risks.
I am hopeful that fintech developers, data aggregators, bank partners, consumers, and regulators will work together to keep consumers in the driver's seat as we move forward with these new technologies.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
See, e.g., Damaris Olaechea, "Who Issued the First Credit Card?" Nerd Wallet (February 12, 2014), www.nerdwallet.com/blog/credit-cards/issued-first-credit-card/.
See, e.g., Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, The Consumer Credit Card Market (PDF), Executive Summary December 2015, and Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August 2017, www.newyorkfed.org/medialibrary/interactives/householdcredit/data/pdf/HHDC_2017Q2.pdf.
Power, "Attractive Rewards and Benefits Drive Credit Card Selection, Satisfaction and Spend," press release, August 20, 2015, www.jdpower.com/sites/default/files/2015137_U.S._Credit_Card_Study_PR_Final.pdf.
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, The Consumer Credit Card Market (PDF), section 7, December 2015.
See, e.g., Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, The Consumer Credit Card Market (PDF), section 6, December 2015.
Aleecia McDonald and Lorrie Faith Cranor, The Cost of Reading Privacy Policies," I/s: A Journal of Law and Policy for the Information Society (2008), pre-press version available at http://lorrie.cranor.org/pubs/readingPolicyCost-authorDraft.pdf.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, FDIC National Survey of Unbanked and Underbanked Households (PDF), (2015).
See, e.g., Michael Corkery and Stacy Cowley, "Household Debt Makes a Comeback in the U.S.," New York Times, May 17, 2017, www.nytimes.com/2017/05/17/business/dealbook/household-debt-united-states.html; See Alexei Alexandrov and Sergei Koulayev, "No Shopping in the U.S.
In one of our counterfactuals, we show that eliminating non-price preferences results in savings of about $9 billion dollars a year.") Return to text
About one in 10 student borrowers is behind on repaying the loans, the highest delinquency rate of any type of loan tracked by the New York Fed's quarterly household debt report."); Jesse Bricker, Lisa J.
Moore, Sarah Pack, John Sabelhaus, Jeffrey Thompson, and Richard A.Windle, "Changes in U.S.
Family Finances from 2013 to 2016: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bulletin vol.
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Quarterly Report on Household Debt and Credit (PDF), August 2017.
( "...[D]elinquency rates for student loans are likely to understate effective delinquency rates because about half of these loans are currently in deferment, in grace periods or in forbearance and therefore temporarily not in the repayment cycle.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Report on the Economic Well-Being of U.S.
See, e.g., David Laibson, Andrea Repetto, and Jeremy Tobacman, "Estimating Discount Functions with Consumption Choices over the Lifecycle (PDF)," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 13314 (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, August 2007).
Madrian, "Simplification and Saving (PDF)," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 12659 (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, 2006).
("Using data from nearly 800,000 employees, …[our] results confirm that participation in 401(k) plans is higher in plans offering a handful of funds, as compared to plans offering ten or more options.") Return to text
See, e.g., Daniel Navarro-Martinez, et al., "Minimum Required Payment and Supplemental Information Disclosure Effects on Consumer Debt Repayment Decisions," Journal of Marketing Research, vol.
("They find that while presenting minimum required payment information has a negative impact on repayment decisions, increasing the minimum required level has a positive effect on repayment for most consumers.") See, e.g., Bridgette C.
Madrian, "Matching Contributions and Savings Outcomes: A Behavioral Economics Perspective (PDF)," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 18220 (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, July 2012).
One result is procrastination--individuals put off decision making as choices become more complicated.") (Internal citations omitted.) Return to text
Karlan, et al, "Getting to the Top of Mind: How Reminders Increase Savings," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 16205, (Cambridge, Mass.: NBER, July 2010).
Keys, "Perverse Nudges: Minimum Payments and Debt Paydown in Consumer Credit Cards," Penn Wharton Public Policy Initiative Issue Brief, vol.
See, e.g., Lael Brainard, "Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack (PDF)," (speech at Northwestern Kellogg Public–Private Interface Conference on New Developments in Consumer Finance: Research and Practice).
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumers and Mobile Financial Services 2016 (PDF), (Washington, Board of Governors, March 2016).
See Bank of America, Trends in Consumer Mobility Report, 2015, http://newsroom.bankofamerica.com/files/doc_library/additional/2015_BAC_Trends_in_Consumer_Mobility_Report.pdf.
(Finding that 35 percent of survey respondents reported that they reach for their mobile devices first thing, as compared to 10 percent for their significant other.) Return to text
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Consumers and Mobile Financial Services 2016 (PDF) .
See, e.g., Lael Brainard, "Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack (PDF)," (speech at Northwestern Kellogg Public–Private Interface Conference on New Developments in Consumer Finance: Research and Practice).
See, e.g., Brett Theodos, et al., An Evaluation of the Impacts and Implementation Approach of Financial Coaching Programs (PDF) (Washington: Urban Institute, October 2015).
Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, The Consumer Credit Card Market (PDF) (Washington: CFPB, December 2015).
Cf., Federal Trade Commission, "Mary Engle Letter to Search Engine Providers (PDF)," n.4, June 24, 2013; Federal Trade Commission, "FTC Consumer Protection Staff Update Agency's Guidance to Search Engine Industry on the Need to Distinguish Between Advertisements and Search Results," press release, June 25, 2013; Federal Trade Commission, "Commercial Alert Response Letter," June 27, 2002.
Cf., Federal Trade Commission, "Mary Engle Letter to Search Engine Providers (PDF)," n.4, June 24, 2013.
Cf., Federal Trade Commission, "The FTC's Endorsement Guides: What People Are Asking," September 2017, ".com Disclosures: How to Make Effective Disclosures in Digital Advertising (PDF)," March 2013.
See, e.g., Finicity, "Finicity and Wells Fargo Ink Data Exchange Deal," press release, April 4, 2017, www.finicity.com/press-release-finicity-wells-fargo-ink-data-exchange-deal/; Wells Fargo & Co., "Intuit Signs New Data-Exchange Agreement with Wells Fargo," press release, February 3, 2017, www.wellsfargo.com/about/press/2017/intuit-agreement_0203/; Intuit, "Chase, Intuit to Give Customers Greater Control of Their Information," press release, January 25, 2017, www.intuit.com/company/press-room/press-releases/2017/Chase-Intuit-to-Give-Customers-Greater-Control-of-Their-Information/; Wells Fargo & Co., "Wells Fargo, Xero Agree on New Data-Exchange Method," press release, June 7, 2016, www.wellsfargo.com/about/press/2016/new-dataexchange-method_0607/; Silicon Valley Bank, "Xero and Silicon Valley Bank Partner to Offer Innovative Companies Next-Generation Financial Management," press release, July 16, 2014, www.svb.com/News/Company-News/Xero-and-Silicon-Valley-Bank-Partner-to-Offer-Innovative-Companies-Next-Generation-Financial-Management/.
(Excluding from the definition of "unauthorized electronic fund transfer" any "electronic fund transfer initiated… [by] a person who was furnished the access device to the consumer's account by the consumer…..") Return to text
who exceeds the authority given, the consumer is fully liable for the transfers unless the consumer has notified the financial institution that transfers by that person are no longer authorized." Return to text
("There are differing interpretations of how regulations, such as the OCC's Third Party Risk Management guidance, the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act's privacy and safeguard rules, and Regulation E liability limits, should be applied to data sharing between financial institutions and third parties like data aggregators and financial technology applications.")
See also JPMorgan Chase, "How You Can Protect Yourself," (last visited October 18, 2017), www.chase.com/digital/resources/privacy-security/security/how-you-can-protect>; Liz Weston, "Why Banks Want You to Drop Mint, Other 'Aggregators,'" Reuters, November 9, 2015, www.reuters.com/article/us-column-weston-banks/why-banks-want-you-to-drop-mint-other-aggregators-idUSKCN0SY2GC20151109.
See, e.g., Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Guidance on Managing Outsourcing Risk (PDF)," SR letter 13-19/CA letter 13-21, December 5, 2013.
See, e.g., American Express, "Introducing the Amex Skill for Amazon Alexa" (last visited October 18, 2017), www.americanexpress.com/us/content/alexa/.; Leena Rao, "American Express Debuts Its First Amazon Alexa Skill," Fortune, May 11, 2017, http://fortune.com/2017/05/11/american-express-alexa-skill/; Capital One, "CapitalOne is on Amazon Echo" (last visited October 18, 2017), www.capitalone.com/applications/alexa/.

At a Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Regional Food Systems Meeting, Boston, Massachusetts
I appreciate the opportunity to listen and learn about the important work that you do.1
One of the Federal Reserve's responsibilities is to understand how communities across America are experiencing the economy.
That is why Congress established a network of Federal Reserve Banks and Branches across the country.
One of the lessons that our community engagement has taught us is that there is an important connection between the strength of regional food systems and community health.
Today's meeting is one in a series that Federal Reserve Banks are holding across the country to talk about local efforts to support regional food systems, and how such efforts can advance communities' goals.
These meetings build on the Federal Reserve Board's release last August of Harvesting Opportunity, a publication that explores the community and economic development potential of investing in regional food systems.2 Through this collaborative research effort, we learned several important lessons about what works to strengthen regional food systems.
First, we learned that appropriately tailored investments in regional food systems have the potential to support the creation of new jobs and small businesses in local communities, as well as to improve farm profitability and financial resilience.
I understand that many of you in this room are engaged in this important work; for that I thank you and hope that this meeting will help advance your efforts.
As a result of an intentional focus on equity and inclusiveness, these investments can create new access to economic opportunity for segments of communities that have often faced challenges, such as people of color, recent immigrants, the formerly homeless, and the previously incarcerated.
Because of the critical role of multi-sectoral partnerships, I am heartened to see so many of you here today to talk about the current state of regional food system investment in New England, to build new relationships, and to strengthen existing ones.
Later today, I will be meeting with several local organizations that not only bring important resources and expertise to their communities, but also exemplify this important dedication to partnership and cross-sector collaboration.
They also advance the broader regional food system by co-hosting an annual conference that brings together farmers, policymakers, investors, and other stakeholders.
Likewise, CommonWealth Kitchen has emerged as an important hub where farmers, entrepreneurs, universities, investors, and other stakeholders come together in ways that not only advance regional food systems, but also increase access to economic opportunity for people impacted by racial, social, or economic inequality.
In this way, CommonWealth Kitchen is dedicated to addressing Greater Boston's growing wealth divide by promoting inclusive entrepreneurship through an integrated approach that links education, training, and manufacturing to a strong network of industry partners, including anchor institutions.
This morning, I am eager to learn about the work of the many organizations represented here, especially the barriers and opportunities you face when trying to invest in this sector, and how your investments are linking more families and communities to meaningful economic opportunities.
Attending events like this and visiting communities around the country provide me with opportunities to speak with families, farmers, small business owners, investors, bankers, and other community members about their experiences in the economy.
These conversations help me to develop a granular and very human understanding of the economy that, when combined with the information provided by our traditional research and data collection efforts, are important considerations informing judgments about policy.
A community-level understanding of the economy is especially important in today's economy, where we see welcome strength in the aggregate statistics coexisting side-by-side with important disparities at the community and family levels.
In addition to disparities based on the community where a family lives and significant and persistent racial disparities, I have been struck while traveling around the country by the widening gulf between the economic fortunes of our large metropolitan areas and those of our small cities, towns, and rural areas.
If some workers and families find it difficult to move, this concentration of economic opportunities in larger cities may have adverse implications for the well-being of these households and, potentially, the economy overall.
In my visits, I have also been heartened by the efforts of local partners to address these disparities and improve their communities, including those aimed at capitalizing on local food-based assets to advance economic opportunity and address food insecurity.
For instance, in El Paso, I visited with several vibrant community organizations that were running community gardens, local nutrition and farming educational outreach programs, a commercial kitchen, and a food pantry to improve nutrition and access to fresh food in an area that lacked full-scale grocery stores.
In the Mississippi Delta, I met with people involved in an interesting collaboration between a local entrepreneur, a community development financial institution, the engineering department of a local community college, local farmers, and local food organizations--the aim of which was to produce biofuels from food waste.
In fact, a recent report found Boston to have one of the highest rates of income inequality among the 100 largest metropolitan areas in the United States, despite the overall strength of Boston's economy.4 Findings like this remind us that not all communities are well positioned to access the opportunities available in the economy, even those in their own backyard.
Our research suggests there are things that can be done to improve the likelihood that an area will be a community of opportunity.
For instance, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston undertook an in-depth study of 25 medium-sized cities nationwide that had experienced a post-industrial decline and identified 10 that experienced an economic resurgence.
For instance, one of the winning cities, Lawrence, Massachusetts, set goals of increasing the income of parents with children in the Lawrence Public School system by 15 percent, dramatically increasing parental engagement in the schools and tracking the impact of these efforts on student achievement.
Thank you for being our valued partners in this important work.
These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Harvesting Opportunity: The Power of Regional Food System Investments to Transform Communities (St.
Louis and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2017).
"Reinvigorating Springfield's Economy: Lessons from Resurgent Cities," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Community Affairs Discussion Paper No.

Douglas's contributions to ethics in government are an important aspect of that legacy, but since Ben and I are the first economists to win this award, I would also like to give due credit to Professor Douglas for his contributions to economics.
Working with the mathematician Charles Cobb, Douglas gathered data and created a statistical model that advanced economists' understanding of the relative contributions to production made by capital and labor.
This work demonstrated many of the methods that economists would come to use and continue to use to this day.
He then employed what were, for the time, advanced statistical techniques to analyze these data, thereby shedding light on a basic economic relationship.
As one recent commentator put it, work such as Douglas's was part of "a growing literature , , , [that] played an important role in shaping the approach to combining statistical methods and economic theory that would become the standard econometric practice in the later decades of the 20th century."1
He mediated labor disputes and advised local government officials in Illinois.
He also helped governors in Pennsylvania and New York develop what became Social Security, unemployment insurance, and the idea of publicly owned power utilities.
Senate in 1942, at the age of 49 he enlisted in the U.S.
One of Paul Douglas's most important achievements in public life was to promote ethics in government.
He was raised with a strong sense of right and wrong and was heavily influenced by the philosopher John Stuart Mill to believe that ethical behavior was also an eminently practical approach to life.
Everyone who asked for a large payment was handed a mimeographed statement titled "Please Help Me to Be an Honest Alderman." At first, the public, inured to corruption, either disbelieved him or thought him a sucker for refusing to take bribes.
The Federal Reserve's very effectiveness in setting monetary policy depends on the public's assured confidence that we act only in its interest.
228 in Jeff Biddle (2012), "Retrospectives: The Introduction of the Cobb-Douglas Regression," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.

At the Roundtable of the Alternative Reference Rates Committee, The Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York (via prerecorded video)
I am sorry that I am not able to be with you today at the FRBNY for this important meeting.
LIBOR gained negative public attention when reports began to surface during the financial crisis that employees at some banks had attempted to manipulate the rate by altering the quotes they submitted for use in the calculation of LIBOR.
The Federal Reserve also joined in international efforts to strengthen LIBOR.
Among other things, we joined the ICE Benchmark Administration's (IBA's) LIBOR Oversight Committee as an observer, and we also worked intensively with international authorities and IBA in developing and encouraging the reforms set out in IBA's Roadmap for LIBOR.
Since many of the pressures around LIBOR stem from the low level of underlying transactions, let me share some data regarding activity in U.S.
Today, there are 17 banks that submit quotes in support of dollar LIBOR.
Some have suggested requiring more banks to submit LIBOR data, but doing so would not materially improve the situation.
The panels in Figure 1 show the distribution of daily aggregate wholesale dollar funding volumes for the 30 global systemically important banks (or GSIBs).
The data here include all of the Eurodollar, federal funds, CD, and commercial paper transactions that the Federal Reserve has access to--the most complete picture of U.S.
For one-month funding, shown in the top panel, the median daily volume of transactions by these banks since money-market reforms took effect last year was just over $1 billion.
If we compare this to the more than $100 trillion in outstanding volumes of U.S.
dollar LIBOR contracts, it should be clear that the activity in this market is miniscule compared to the size of the contracts written on it.
In our view, it would not be feasible to produce a robust, transaction-based rate constructed from the activity in wholesale unsecured funding markets.
A transactions-based rate from this market would be fairly easy to manipulate given such a thin level of activity, and the rate itself would likely be quite volatile.
As we discussed these issues with the officials in the United Kingdom who oversee and regulate LIBOR, we also became aware that they were receiving a steady stream of requests, and sometimes demands, from banks seeking to leave the LIBOR panels.
The use of expert judgment in submissions allows LIBOR to be published every day, but many banks are now understandably uncomfortable with being asked to provide judgment about something that they do very little of.
In his July speech, Andrew Bailey discussed the efforts of the FCA to keep these banks on the panels.
Market participants should understand that the official sector has done everything it can to stabilize and strengthen LIBOR.
As time has passed, some banks have grown more resistant to public-sector entreaties to remain on the panels.
At the same time, we have had to confront the fact that, if banks could not be persuaded to voluntarily remain on panels, then the legal powers to compel them to do so were limited.
Given this time limit, brokering a voluntary agreement with the submitting banks to stay on for a longer period was the last, best choice that authorities had available to guarantee some further period of stability for LIBOR.
CFTC Chairman Chris Giancarlo and I have publicly supported the FCA's efforts to secure an agreement with the submitting banks to stay on through the end of 2021, and we have encouraged the U.S.
banks that submit to LIBOR to cooperate with FCA's effort.
Of course, LIBOR may remain viable well past 2021, but we do not think that market participants can safely assume that it will.
Users of LIBOR must now take in to account the risk that it may not always be published.
While the public's understanding of this risk has increased significantly since Andrew Bailey's speech, the official sector has been concerned about it for some years, as reflected for example in our public comments and in the annual reports of the Financial Stability Oversight Council.
Given our understanding of the risks to LIBOR, the Federal Reserve convened the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (or ARRC) in 2014 in cooperation with the Treasury Department and CFTC.
Consistent with recommendations from the Financial Stability Board (FSB), we charged the ARRC with identifying a robust alternative to U.S.
First, I'd note that, like most market participants, the ARRC members initially had a difficult time conceiving of any kind of transition from LIBOR.
Second, it is clear that any rate the ARRC selected as a potential alternative needed to be highly robust.
There would be no point in selecting a rate that might find itself quickly in the same kinds of conditions that LIBOR is in now.
In our view, the ARRC has chosen the most robust rate available.
The overnight Treasury repo market is the largest and most active market in any tenor of U.S.
Figure 2 illustrates the point: the transactions underlying the Secured Overnight Financing Rate (SOFR), at about $700 billion per day or more, are much larger than the volumes in overnight unsecured markets, even much larger than estimates of the volume in Treasury bills, and they dwarf the volumes in other term markets.
The alternative reference rate needs to be able to stand the weight of having trillions of dollars written on it, and the ARRC has definitely met this standard in choosing SOFR.
Third, we charged the ARRC with devising plans for a voluntary transition that encouraged the use of their recommended rate where appropriate.
The ARRC did consider whether other cash products could move from LIBOR to the rates it evaluated, but their paced transition plan has focused on derivatives because that is where the largest gross exposures to LIBOR are, and because it may be easier for many derivatives transactions to move away from LIBOR to a new rate.
Now, however, market participants have realized that they may need to more seriously consider transitioning other products away from LIBOR, and the ARRC has expanded its work to help ensure that this can be done in a coordinated way that avoids unnecessary disruptions.
That term reference rate would have to be built by first developing futures and OIS markets that reference SOFR.
It will likely never be as robust as SOFR itself, and so derivatives transactions will almost certainly need to be based on the overnight rate, but a term reference rate could conceivably be used in some loan or other contracts that currently reference LIBOR.
The FSB has been working with the International Swaps and Derivatives Association (or ISDA) to devise better language for derivatives, and ISDA's Scott O'Malia and Katherine Tew Darras will discuss that work later this morning.
This is important work, both for the parties to these contracts and for our financial stability.
While there may be no perfect contract language or fallback, good risk management requires that we work together to find language and fallbacks that are robust and that limit unintended valuation changes.
I have been heartened in seeing that many market participants are already confronting these issues.
But the efforts we have undertaken with the ARRC show what is possible when the official sector works collectively with market participants.
If market participants are willing to continue to work together, then we can safely achieve the transitions needed to create a better and more robust system that will help to ensure our ongoing financial stability.


Namely, I will discuss the unconventional monetary policy tools used by the Federal Reserve since the start of the financial crisis and Great Recession and the role that those tools may play in addressing future economic challenges.
Nearly 10 years ago, with our nation mired in its worst economic and financial crisis since the Great Depression, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) confronted a key challenge to the pursuit of its congressionally mandated goals of maximum employment and price stability: how to support a weakening U.S.
economy once our main conventional policy tool, the federal funds rate, had been lowered to essentially zero.
Addressing that problem eventually led to a second challenge: how to ensure that we could scale back monetary policy accommodation in an orderly fashion once it was no longer needed.
Failure to meet either challenge would have significantly compromised our ability to foster maximum employment and price stability, leading to serious consequences for the livelihoods of millions of Americans.
Thanks in part to the monetary policy accommodation provided in the aftermath of the crisis--especially through enhanced forward rate guidance and large-scale asset purchases--the U.S.
Indeed, with the economy now operating near maximum employment and inflation expected to rise to the FOMC's 2 percent objective over the next couple of years, the FOMC has been scaling back the accommodation provided in response to the Great Recession.
In no small part because of our authority to pay interest on excess reserves, the process of removing policy accommodation is working well.
After discussing a few issues related to our recent decision to start reducing the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet, I will address a key question: What is the appropriate future role of the unconventional policy tools that we deployed to address the Great Recession? While I believe that influencing short-term interest rates should continue to be our primary monetary policy lever in normal times, our unconventional policy tools will likely be needed again should some future economic downturn drive short-term interest rates back to their effective lower bound.
Indeed, empirical analysis suggests that the neutral federal funds rate--defined as the level of the federal funds rate that is neither expansionary nor contractionary when the economy is operating near its potential--is much lower than in previous decades.
Consequently, the probability that short-term interest rates may need to be reduced to their effective lower bound at some point is uncomfortably high, even in the absence of a major financial and economic crisis.
I will return to the question about the future of our various policy tools, but first I would like to review our experience this decade, which I view as instructive for addressing that question.
economy is much stronger today than it would have been without the unconventional monetary policy tools deployed by the Federal Reserve in response to the Great Recession.
Two key tools were large-scale asset purchases and forward guidance about our intentions for the future path of short-term interest rates.
The rationale for those tools was straightforward: Given our inability to meaningfully lower short-term interest rates after they reached near-zero in late 2008, the FOMC used increasingly explicit forward rate guidance and asset purchases to apply downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, which were still well above zero.
Longer-term interest rates reflect, in part, financial market participants' expectations of the future path of short-term interest rates.
As a result, FOMC communications that affect those expectations--such as the enhanced forward rate guidance provided in our post-meeting statements in the aftermath of the Great Recession--can affect longer-term interest rates.1 In addition, longer-term interest rates include a term premium, which is the compensation demanded by investors for bearing the interest rate risk associated with longer-term securities.
When the Federal Reserve buys longer-term securities in the open market, the remaining stock of securities available for purchase by the public declines, which pushes the prices of those securities up and thus depresses their yields by lowering the term premiums embedded in those yields.2 Several studies have found that our forward rate guidance and asset purchases did appreciably reduce longer-term interest rates.3
The FOMC's goal in lowering longer-term interest rates was to help the U.S.
economy recover from the recession and stem the disinflationary forces that emerged from it.
Some have suggested that the slow pace of the economic recovery proves that our unconventional policy tools were ineffective.
Indeed, the evidence strongly suggests that forward rate guidance and securities purchases--by substantially lowering borrowing costs for millions of American families and businesses and making overall financial conditions more accommodative--did help spur consumption and business spending, lower the unemployment rate, and stave off disinflationary pressures.4
Other central banks also deployed unconventional policy tools in the years that followed the financial crisis.5 Evidence accumulated from their experience also supports the notion that these tools have helped stimulate economic activity in their countries after their short-term interest rates were lowered to near-zero--and, in some cases, even below zero.6
economy was making notable progress toward the FOMC's goals of maximum employment and price stability.
The unemployment rate had dropped to 6 percent by midyear--well below its Great Recession peak of 10 percent--and other measures of labor market conditions were also showing significant improvement.
Reflecting that progress, the Federal Reserve's focus was shifting from providing additional monetary policy accommodation to scaling it back.7 A key question for the FOMC then was how to reduce the degree of accommodation in the context of a vastly expanded Federal Reserve balance sheet.
One possible approach was to start by reducing the Federal Reserve's securities holdings while short-term interest rates remained at the lower bound.
We could allow securities to roll off the Federal Reserve's balance sheet and even sell securities, thereby putting upward pressure on long-term rates while calibrating the pace and configuration of the reduction in our holdings as warranted by our maximum employment and price stability objectives.
Eventually, once our securities holdings had shrunk sufficiently, the FOMC could start nudging up its short-term interest rate target.
One problem of this "last in, first out" approach was that the FOMC does not have any experience in calibrating the pace and composition of asset redemptions and sales to actual and prospective economic conditions.
Indeed, as the so-called taper tantrum of 2013 illustrated, even talk of prospective changes in our securities holdings can elicit unexpected abrupt changes in financial conditions.
Given the lack of experience with reducing our asset holdings to scale back monetary policy accommodation and the need to carefully calibrate the removal of accommodation, the FOMC opted to allow changes in the Federal Reserve's securities holdings to play a secondary role in the Committee's normalization strategy.
Rather than balance sheet shrinkage, the FOMC decided that its primary tool for scaling back monetary policy accommodation would be influencing short-term interest rates.
As we explained in our "normalization principles" issued in September 2014, the FOMC decided to maintain the overall size of the Federal Reserve's securities holdings at an elevated level until sometime after the FOMC had begun to raise short-term interest rates.8 Once normalization of the level of the federal funds rate was "well under way" and the Committee judged that the economic expansion was strong enough that further increases in short-term interest rates were likely to be warranted, the FOMC would gradually and predictably reduce the size of the balance sheet by allowing the Federal Reserve's securities holdings to "run off"--that is, we would allow our balance sheet to shrink passively by not reinvesting all of the principal payments from our securities.9
One advantage of the FOMC's chosen approach to scaling back accommodation is that both the FOMC and the public have decades of experience with adjustments in short-term interest rates in response to changes in economic conditions.
Nonetheless, the post-crisis environment presented a new test to the FOMC's ability to influence short-term interest rates.
Before the crisis, the FOMC could raise the federal funds rate--the rate at which banks with excess reserves lend to banks with a reserve need--by removing a small amount of reserves from the banking system.
That would translate into a higher federal funds rate because reserves were relatively scarce to begin with.
The intuition was simple: The FOMC would signal that it was going to tighten conditions in the reserve market, and the cost of obtaining reserves in the market--the federal funds rate--would rise.
After the crisis, however, reserves were plentiful because the Federal Reserve funded its large-scale asset purchases through adding reserves to the system--crediting the bank accounts of those who were selling assets to the Fed.
Moreover, in light of the FOMC's decision not to sell the longer-term securities it acquired, reserves were likely to remain plentiful for the foreseeable future.
Consequently, when the time came to remove accommodation, a key question for the Committee was how to raise the federal funds rate in an environment of abundant reserves.10 An important part of the answer to that question came in the Federal Reserve's authority to pay interest on excess reserves.
The Congress granted the Federal Reserve that authority in 2006, to become effective in 2011.
Having authority to pay interest on excess reserves means that the Federal Reserve can influence the federal funds rate and other short-term interest rates regardless of the amount of excess reserves in the banking system.
The mechanics of the new framework are straightforward: Banks will generally only provide short-term funding at an interest rate around or above what they could earn at the Fed.
As a result, if the Federal Reserve raised the rate it paid, other short-term lending rates would likely rise as well.11 This new approach for raising short-term interest rates is working well: Since December 2015, we have raised the interest paid on excess reserves and the target range for the federal funds rate by 100 basis points, and the effective federal funds rate has risen accordingly.12
In light of our recent decision to start reducing our securities holdings this month, I would like to discuss a few aspects of our balance sheet strategy.13 The FOMC anticipated that its decision to maintain the size of the Federal Reserve's securities holdings at an elevated level until sometime after the beginning of rate hikes would keep some downward pressure on longer-term interest rates well after the end of its asset purchase programs.
Although estimates of the effect of our securities holdings on longer-term interest rates are subject to uncertainty, a recent study reported that the Federal Reserve's securities holdings were reducing the term premium on the 10-year Treasury yield by roughly 1 percentage point at the end of 2016.14
The guidance that the FOMC would eventually start a gradual and predictable reduction of the Federal Reserve's securities holdings implied that the downward pressure on longer-term yields would likely diminish over time as financial market participants came to expect that the start of balance sheet normalization was nearing.
Indeed, with that process now under way, it is likely that our securities holdings are now depressing the term premium on the 10-year yield by somewhat less than the 1 percentage point estimate reported for late last year.
Several factors suggest that the downward pressure on term premiums exerted by our securities holdings is likely to diminish only gradually as our holdings shrink.
For instance, as I have already noted, our intention to reduce our balance sheet by reducing reinvestment of repayments of principal on our holdings--rather than selling assets--has been well communicated for several years now.
As a result, we do not anticipate a jump in term premiums as our balance sheet reduction plan gets under way.
In addition, the maturity distribution of our securities holdings is such that it will take some years for the size of our holdings to normalize via runoff.15
The judgment that the downward pressure on term premiums will decline only gradually as we reduce the size of our balance sheet stands in sharp contrast to evidence suggesting that this pressure built up rather quickly when we were expanding our balance sheet.
To understand this contrast, remember that, unlike our plan to shrink our balance sheet, the various phases of our asset purchases had, to differing degrees, an element of surprise, with asset purchase announcements occasionally leaving a distinct imprint on the path of longer-term yields.
Moreover, each of our asset purchase programs resulted in a rapid increase in our securities holdings during a relatively short period, whereas the normalization process will play out gradually over many years.
I have focused thus far on the likely response of term premiums to our balance sheet reduction plan.
Let me turn my attention briefly to the likely response of longer-term yields, which, as I have noted, reflect both a term premium component and expectations of the future path of short-term interest rates.
While the available evidence points to a strong reaction of longer-term yields to our asset purchases, it is conceivable that those yields will react much more modestly to our balance sheet reduction plan.
Consider, for instance, a hypothetical scenario in which the FOMC has decided not to rely on balance sheet reduction to scale back accommodation, choosing instead to continue to reinvest indefinitely all principal payments from the Federal Reserve's securities holdings.
If financial market participants perceived no change in the economic outlook and no intention on the part of the FOMC to alter the overall stance of monetary policy, the FOMC's inclination to leave the size of the balance sheet unchanged would be taken as an indication that the FOMC would instead rely more on increases in short-term interest rates to scale back accommodation, resulting in a faster pace of short-term interest hikes.
On net, longer-term yields may be little affected by this hypothetical scenario: While the decreased emphasis on balance sheet reduction would depress term premiums and hold longer-term yields lower, the expected faster pace of short-term interest rate increases would push longer-term yields higher.16
As the financial crisis and Great Recession fade into the past and the stance of monetary policy gradually returns to normal, a natural question concerns the possible future role of the unconventional policy tools we deployed after the onset of the crisis.
My colleagues on the FOMC and I believe that, whenever possible, influencing short-term interest rates by targeting the federal funds rate should be our primary tool.
In contrast, we have much more limited experience with using our securities holdings for that purpose.
Where does this assessment leave our unconventional policy tools? I believe their deployment should be considered again if our conventional tool reaches its limit--that is, when the federal funds rate has reached its effective lower bound and the U.S.
Recent studies suggest that the neutral level of the federal funds rate appears to be much lower than it was in previous decades.17 Indeed, most FOMC participants now assess the longer-run value of the neutral federal funds rate as only 2-3/4 percent or so, compared with around 4-1/4 percent just a few years ago.18 With a low neutral federal funds rate, there will typically be less scope for the FOMC to reduce short-term interest rates in response to an economic downturn, raising the possibility that we may need to resort again to enhanced forward rate guidance and asset purchases to provide needed accommodation.19
Of course, substantial uncertainty surrounds any estimates of the neutral level of short-term interest rates.
In this regard, there is an important asymmetry to consider.
If the neutral rate turns out to be significantly higher than we currently estimate, it is less likely that we will have to deploy our unconventional tools again.
In contrast, if the neutral rate is as low as we estimate or even lower, we will be glad to have our unconventional tools in our toolkit.
If we are indeed living in a low-neutral-rate world, a significantly less severe economic downturn than the Great Recession might be sufficient to drive short-term interest rates back to their effective lower bound.
As a result of the Great Recession, the Federal Reserve has confronted two key challenges over the past several years: One, the FOMC had to provide additional policy accommodation after short-term interest rates reached their effective lower bound; and two, subsequently, as we made progress toward the achievement of our mandate, we had to start scaling back that accommodation in the presence of a vastly expanded Federal Reserve balance sheet.
First, the monetary policy tools that the Federal Reserve deployed in the immediate aftermath of the crisis--explicit forward rate guidance, large-scale asset purchases, and the payment of interest on excess reserves--have helped us overcome these challenges.
Second, in light of evidence suggesting that the neutral level of short-term interest rates is significantly lower than it was in previous decades, the likelihood that future monetary policymakers will have to confront those two challenges again is uncomfortably high.
For this reason, we must keep our unconventional policy tools ready to be deployed again should short-term interest rates return to their effective lower bound.
Before the Great Recession, the FOMC occasionally provided forward rate guidance, but that guidance was typically confined to a relatively short horizon.
In addition to depressing term premiums, large-scale asset purchases by the Federal Reserve can lower longer-term yields if those purchases are perceived by the public as a signal that short-term interest rates are likely to remain lower for longer than previously anticipated.
Williams (2014), "Measuring the Effect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium- and Longer-Term Interest Rates," American Economic Review, vol.
3154-85; Joseph Gagnon, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2011), "The Financial Market Effects of the Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchases (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
3-43; and Stefania D'Amico, William English, David Lopez-Salido, and Edward Nelson (2012), "The Federal Reserve's Large-Scale Asset Purchase Programmes: Rationale and Effects," Economic Journal, vol.
Engen, Thomas Laubach, and David Reifschneider (2015), "The Macroeconomic Effects of the Federal Reserve's Unconventional Monetary Policies," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2015-005 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January).
The Bank of Japan had deployed unconventional tools well before the crisis.
624 (London: Bank of England, October); and Luca Gambetti and Alberto Musso (2017), "The Macroeconomic Impact of the ECB's Expanded Asset Purchase Programme (APP) (PDF)," ECB Working Paper 2075 (Frankfurt: European Central Bank, June).
Information on the FOMC's Policy Normalization Principles and Plans is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/policy-normalization.htm.
The FOMC announced in December 2015 that it anticipated maintaining its reinvestment policy until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate was "well under way." That announcement is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/monetary20151216a1.pdf.
More recently, in June 2017, the FOMC provided additional details regarding its approach to reduce the Federal Reserve's securities holdings, indicating that once the balance sheet normalization plan began, principal payments received from securities held by the Federal Reserve would be reinvested only to the extent that those payments exceeded certain monthly caps.
The June 2017 announcement, Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_PolicyNormalization.20170613.pdf.
For a discussion of the pre- and post-crisis frameworks for implementing short-term interest rate decisions, see Jane E.
Weinbach (2015), "Rewriting Monetary Policy 101: What's the Fed's Preferred Post-Crisis Approach to Raising Interest Rates? (PDF)" Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
The Federal Reserve created supplementary tools to be used as needed to help strengthen its influence over short-term interest rates when reserves are plentiful.
For instance, the overnight reverse repurchase agreement facility allows a variety of counterparties, including eligible money market funds, government-sponsored enterprises, broker-dealers, and depository institutions to invest funds overnight with the Federal Reserve at a rate determined by the FOMC.
For a discussion of how increases in the FOMC's target range for the federal funds rate have transmitted to other short-term interest rates, see Alyssa Anderson, Jane Ihrig, Mary-Frances Styczynski, and Gretchen C.
Weinbach (2017), "How Have the Fed's Three Rate Hikes Passed through to Selected Short-Term Interest Rates?" FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June 2).
The FOMC's announcement of the beginning of implementation of the balance sheet normalization plan is available on the Board's website; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement (PDF)," press release, September 20.
See Brian Bonis, Jane Ihrig, and Min Wei (2017), "Projected Evolution of the SOMA Portfolio and the 10-Year Treasury Term Premium Effect," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 22).
Moreover, as the FOMC announced in June, the Committee decided to cap the monthly run-off in the Federal Reserve's securities holdings, making the balance sheet normalization process even more predictable and gradual.
The FOMC's announcement is available on the Board's website; see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), "FOMC Issues Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans," press release, June 14.
In contrast, when the Federal Reserve was purchasing assets, short-term interest rates were at their effective lower bound, and they were expected to remain there for the foreseeable future.
As a result, decisions to buy additional assets--and the resulting additional downward pressure on term premiums--were not offset by expectations of a higher path for short-term interest rates.
The end result was that there was greater potential for asset purchases to have a discernible effect on longer-term yields in the years immediately following the financial crisis than in current circumstances.
West (2015), "The Equilibrium Real Funds Rate: Past, Present, and Future," NBER Working Paper Series 21476 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August); Olivier Blanchard (2016), "Three Remarks on the U.S.
Treasury Yield Curve," Peterson Institute for International Economics, RealTime Economic Issues Watch (blog), June 22, https://piie.com/blogs/realtime-economic-issues-watch/three-remarks-us-treasury-yield-curve; and Kathryn Holston, Thomas Laubach, and John C.
Williams (2016), "Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants (PDF)," Working Paper Series 2016-11 (San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, December).
FOMC participants' most recent projections of the federal funds rate are discussed in an addendum to the minutes of the Committee's September 2017 meeting, available in an October 11, 2017, press release on the Federal Reserve Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/pressreleases/monetary20171011a.htm.
Yellen (2016), "The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future," speech delivered at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26; and David Reifschneider (2016), "Gauging the Ability of the FOMC to Respond to Future Recessions (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-068 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August).

At the 41st Annual Central Banking Seminar, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York
companies by market capitalization are classified as "technology companies," where the term describes the products that these companies sell and how they operate.
I will discuss the roles of banks, fintech companies, and other stakeholders in moving the United States forward to a better payment system.
I will also review the Federal Reserve's collaboration with these payment system stakeholders in pursuing that goal.
For example, today financial technology can support access to credit through innovative approaches to gathering and analyzing data.
Historically, a customer seeking a loan has provided financial statements to a bank or other traditional lending institution.
With this additional information, the bank would have a more complete picture of an applicant's day-to-day activity and overall financial capacity, and potentially a greater ability to provide credit to customers, including some who might have been otherwise denied a loan based on traditional data.
Fintech firms are also finding ways to use banks' data, in some cases without entering into an explicit partnership with the bank.
With customers' permission, fintech firms have increasingly turned to data aggregators to "screen scrape" information from financial accounts.
This information can be used to provide consumers with convenient real-time snapshots of their financial information across multiple banks and accounts.
These examples highlight that there is a balance that needs to be achieved in this innovative environment.2 On the one hand, new technologies have enabled banks and other firms to find different ways of meeting consumers' demand for speed and convenience.
In late 2015, Google estimated that the average mobile session lasts only 70 seconds, and may be repeated dozens of times per day.3 As a result, payment innovators have had to create new ways to move money that are not only fast and mobile-focused, but also sufficiently "frictionless" that consumers can now fit commerce into these brief interludes.
We can use a payments app to move funds instantly to anyone who has that app.4 Some banks have similarly collaborated to build faster payments applications that leverage their deposit account systems.
Similarly, payment providers can now leverage the application programming interfaces (APIs)--essentially the protocols--of smartphone messaging services to integrate their payment tools directly into messaging applications: Nowadays, consumers can simply "attach" money while messaging a friend.
Consumers will not store their funds in a system that is not secure and will not want to transfer funds out of an otherwise secure system if the process is cumbersome.
The examples I have highlighted so far illustrate payments innovations from fintech firms and banks alike.
I want to spend a moment highlighting the special role of banks in the payments process, and how banks are needed in order to create innovations that can be used broadly across the economy.
The traditional role of banks in the payments process has been to hold deposits and enable their transfer from one individual or business to another.
Over time, we have moved from ATMs and paper checks toward electronic payments and online payments through banking platforms--payment methods for which banks are still perceived as essential.
At times, the payments process is so seamlessly integrated that one can forget that there is even a bank in the process, as with the Uber and Lyft example.
And banks are still important players in making that happen.
Even where this reality is obscured by several layers of technology, there is almost always a bank involved in consumer transactions.
Given their importance in holding and transferring funds, banks continue to have a key role to play in the design and safety of more efficient retail payment systems.
Without bank participation, it would be difficult to change how funds are transferred in a way that brings pervasive benefits to consumers.
For example, if the aim is to capture the speed and continuous nature of today's commerce in the payment system as a whole--as has become a focus for many countries, including the United States--it would be difficult to do so without banks allowing the transfer of their deposits on a 24x7 real-time basis.
Of course, individual payment systems are already doing this for consumers within their own network.
But achieving these benefits on a broad scale would be challenging without the banking system's participation, because of the large role banks have in holding and transferring funds.
All this is to say that we are at a critical juncture in the payment system's evolution, where technology is rapidly changing many facets of the payments process.
Fintech firms and banks are seizing these technological changes in their own ways.
But a collective and collaborative effort by all payment stakeholders will also be important as the United States works to achieve a payment system that has broad reach and can seamlessly integrate with other systems to transfer funds in a reliable, secure, and convenient manner.
When we pay with cash or write a check, we don't spend a lot of time worrying about who our recipient banks with; that universality seems an appropriate standard for new payment options as well.
At the Federal Reserve, we believe it is important to embrace opportunities provided by technological change to improve the convenience and safety of the U.S.
About five years ago, we launched our payment system improvement initiative, which committed the Federal Reserve to working with the full range of payments system stakeholders to achieve a faster, more secure payment system.
We saw that technology was transforming the nature of commerce and end-user expectations for payment services.
We saw some players coming to market with innovative product offerings, but it was a fragmented approach.
Meanwhile, other countries were advancing on initiatives to improve the speed and safety of their payment systems, creating a gap between the U.S.
While the Federal Reserve does not have plenary authority over payment systems, as is the case in some other countries, we have often played an important role as a leader and catalyst for change.
It was in this role that we issued a call to action asking stakeholders to come together in pursuit of a better payment system for the future--focusing on speed, security, efficiency, international payments, and collaboration.5 I believe a collaborative approach ensures that change is designed by those whose commitment and expertise are needed to improve the payment system.
Stakeholders – including banks, fintech companies, consumer groups, regulators, and others -- answered our call to action, signing up for two task forces convened by the Federal Reserve.
The Faster Payments Task Force's mission was to identify and assess alternative approaches for implementing a safe, ubiquitous, faster payments system in the United States.
The task force began its work by developing a set of effectiveness criteria laying out desirable attributes for faster payment solutions covering the broad categories of ubiquity, efficiency, safety and security, speed, legal framework, and governance.
The task force encouraged its members to submit proposals for faster payment solutions that would meet the criteria that its members had agreed upon.
Some are based on traditional assets held in transaction accounts, and others depend on new asset forms like digital currencies.
The role of the task force process was not to recommend or implement a faster payment solution, but rather to offer a range of ideas to move the United States further along the path to a better payment system.
We are very grateful to the members of the Faster Payment Task Force for all of their work and for the collaborative spirit they brought to the job.
But there is more to be done to advance our collective vision of a ubiquitous, real-time, secure future payment system.
Last month, the Federal Reserve reaffirmed its commitment to that vision in the paper, "Federal Reserve Next Steps in the Payments Improvement Journey," which outlines refreshed strategies and tactics that we, in collaboration with the payment industry, will employ to make further progress.8 I will mention just a few.
This work group will carry out many of the task force recommendations and the Federal Reserve, at the request of the task force, is chairing and facilitating this effort.
In addition, the Federal Reserve is considering providing settlement services--a traditional core function of a central bank--to address the future needs of a ubiquitous real-time retail payments environment.
We also plan to explore and assess the need, if any, for other related Federal Reserve services or capabilities.
In carrying out this assessment, we will be guided by current and potential market developments and challenges, as well as our long-established criteria for offering new products and services.
The Federal Reserve will also continue to support the ongoing work of the Secure Payments Task Force.
This task force has been working to educate stakeholders on payment security practices, risks, and actions that could enhance payment security.
These are challenging topics, because they require stakeholders to be open and forthcoming about potential vulnerabilities if there is to be substantial progress.
The Federal Reserve will also pursue two new efforts focused on security.
Early in 2018, we plan to launch a study analyzing payment security vulnerabilities.
This study is similar to other research efforts that the Federal Reserve has pursued to build foundational and collective understanding of the U.S.
We also plan to build upon the contributions of the Secure Payments Task Force to establish work groups focused on approaches for reducing the cost and prevalence of specific payment security vulnerabilities.
In a world of ever-escalating threats to the integrity of our payment system, this collective action is needed to sustain public confidence.
The package of next steps the Federal Reserve outlined in its recent paper confirm that we remain steadfast in our commitment to work with industry and other stakeholders to achieve a better payment system through both leadership and action.
Fintech firms and banks are embracing this change, as they strive to address consumer demands for more timely and convenient payments.
It is essential, however, that this innovation not come at the cost of a safe and secure payment system that retains the confidence of its end users.
The examples I have drawn upon today highlight that fintech firms and banks must each play a role in assuring that enhancements to convenience and speed do not undermine safety and security.
More broadly, the Faster and Secure Payments Task Forces demonstrate the importance of broad and diverse stakeholder input, which are essential if the United States is to implement safe, ubiquitous real-time retail payments.
Working together, we can achieve a safe and fast payments system that meets the evolving needs of consumers and our dynamic economy.
See Lael Brainard, "Where Do Banks Fit in the Fintech Stack?" (speech delivered at the Northwestern Kellogg Public-Private Interface Conference on "New Developments in Consumer Finance: Research & Practice," Evanston, Illinois, April 28, 2017).
On behalf of the task force, the Federal Reserve selected McKinsey & Company to conduct a comprehensive assessment of each faster payment solution proposal against the task force's set of criteria.
See Federal Reserve System, "Federal Reserve Next Steps in the Payments Improvement Journey (PDF)," September 6, 2017.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, "Policies: The Federal Reserve in the Payments System," revised 1990.

At the Group of 30 International Banking Seminar, Washington, D.C.
I would like to thank the Group of Thirty for inviting me to participate in their International Banking Seminar and also thank Luis Alberto Moreno of the Inter-American Development Bank for hosting this event.
Economic activity in the United States has been growing moderately so far this year, and the labor market has continued to strengthen.
economy are quite noticeable in the short term, history suggests that the longer-term effects will be modest and that aggregate economic activity will recover quickly.
Starting with the labor market, through August, payroll job gains averaged 170,000 per month this year, down only a little from the average pace of gains in 2016 and still well above estimates of the pace necessary to absorb new entrants to the labor force.
In September, payrolls were reported to have declined 33,000, but that weakness reflected the effects of Hurricane Irma, which hit Florida during the reference week for the September labor market surveys.
I would expect employment to bounce back in subsequent months as communities recover and people return to their jobs.
The unemployment rate, which seems not to have been noticeably affected by the hurricanes, declined further to 4.2 percent, down about 1/2 percentage point from the end of 2016 and below the median of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' estimates of its longer-run normal level.
Labor force participation continues to strengthen relative to a downward trend that reflects, in part, the aging of the population.
Other labor market indicators, including the rates of job openings and the number of people who voluntarily quit their jobs, also point to strength.
On balance, wage gains appear moderate, and the pace seems broadly consistent with a tightening labor market once we account for the disappointing productivity growth in recent years.
I expect the labor market to strengthen further as economic growth continues.
The hurricanes will likely result in some hit to GDP growth in the third quarter but a rebound thereafter, and smoothing through those movements, I'm expecting growth that continues to exceed potential in the second half of the year.
The latest projections from FOMC participants have a median of 2-1/2 percent GDP growth this year.
Growth of consumer spending has been supported by the ongoing job gains and relatively high levels of household wealth and consumer sentiment.
Exports also have risen this year, as growth abroad has solidified and the exchange value of the dollar has declined somewhat.
My fellow FOMC participants and I perceive that risks to global growth have receded somewhat and expect growth to continue to improve over the near term.
Earlier this year, the 12-month change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) reached 2 percent, and core PCE inflation reached 1.9 percent.
These readings seemed consistent with the view that inflation had been held down by both the sizable fall in oil prices and the appreciation of the dollar starting around mid-2014, and that these influences have diminished significantly by this year.
Accordingly, inflation seemed well on its way to the FOMC's 2 percent inflation objective on a sustainable basis.
Inflation readings over the past several months have been surprisingly soft, however, and the 12-month change in core PCE prices has fallen to 1.3 percent.
More generally, it is common to see movements in inflation of a few tenths of a percentage point that are hard to explain, and such "surprises" should not really be surprising.
My best guess is that these soft readings will not persist, and with the ongoing strengthening of labor markets, I expect inflation to move higher next year.
In the latest Summary of Economic Projections, my colleagues and I project inflation to move higher next year and to reach 2 percent by 2019.
To be sure, our understanding of the forces that drive inflation is imperfect, and we recognize that this year's low inflation could reflect something more persistent than is reflected in our baseline projections.
The fact that a number of other advanced economies are also experiencing persistently low inflation understandably adds to the sense among many analysts that something more structural may be going on.
First, given that estimates of the natural rate of unemployment are so uncertain, it is possible that there is more slack in U.S.
labor markets than is commonly recognized, which may be true for some other advanced economies as well.
If so, some further tightening in the labor market might be needed to lift inflation back to 2 percent.
Second, some measures of longer-term inflation expectations have edged lower over the past few years in several major economies, and it remains an open question whether these measures might be reflecting a true decline in expectations that is broad enough to be affecting actual inflation outcomes.
Third, our framework for understanding inflation dynamics could be misspecified in some way.
For example, global developments--perhaps technological in nature, such as the tremendous growth of online shopping--could be helping to hold down inflation in a persistent way in many countries.
Or there could be sector-specific developments--such as the subdued rise in medical prices in the United States in recent years--that are not typically included in aggregate inflation equations but which have contributed to lower inflation.
Such global and sectoral developments could continue to be important restraining influences on inflation.
Of course, there are also risks that could unexpectedly boost inflation more rapidly than expected, such as resource utilization having a stronger influence when the economy is running closer to full capacity.
In this economic environment, with ongoing improvements in labor market conditions and softness in inflation that is expected to be temporary, the FOMC has continued its policy of gradual policy normalization.
As the Committee announced after our September meeting, we are initiating our balance sheet normalization program this month.
That program, which was described in the June Addendum to the Policy Normalization Principles and Plans, will gradually scale back our reinvestments of proceeds from maturing Treasury securities and principal payments from agency securities.
As a result, our balance sheet will decline gradually and predictably.2 By limiting the volume of securities that private investors will have to absorb as we reduce our holdings, the caps should guard against outsized moves in interest rates and other potential market strains.
Changing the target range for the federal funds rate is our primary means of adjusting the stance of monetary policy.
Our balance sheet is not intended to be an active tool for monetary policy in normal times.
We therefore do not plan on making adjustments to our balance sheet normalization program.
But, of course, as we stated in June, the Committee would be prepared to resume reinvestments if a material deterioration in the economic outlook were to warrant a sizable reduction in the federal funds rate.
Also at our September meeting, the Committee decided to maintain its target for the federal funds rate.
We continue to expect that the ongoing strength of the economy will warrant gradual increases in that rate to sustain a healthy labor market and stabilize inflation around our 2 percent longer-run objective.
That expectation is based on our view that the federal funds rate remains somewhat below its neutral level--that is, the level that is neither expansionary nor contractionary and keeps the economy operating on an even keel.
The neutral rate currently appears to be quite low by historical standards, implying that the federal funds rate would not have to rise much further to get to a neutral policy stance.
But we expect the neutral level of the federal funds rate to rise somewhat over time, and, as a result, additional gradual rate hikes are likely to be appropriate over the next few years to sustain the economic expansion.
Indeed, FOMC participants have built such a gradual path of rate hikes into their projections for the next couple of years.
I have spoken about some of the uncertainties associated with the inflation outlook in particular, and we will be paying close attention to the inflation data in the months ahead.
As always, the Committee will adjust the stance of monetary policy in response to incoming economic information and the evolution of the economic outlook to achieve its objectives of maximum employment and stable prices.
Moreover, we are mindful of the possibility that shifting expectations concerning the path of U.S.
policy can lead to spillovers to other economies via financial markets and the value of the dollar.
We remain committed to communicating as clearly and effectively as possible to help mitigate the risk of sudden changes in the policy outlook among market participants that could spur unintended effects in global financial markets.
For further discussion, see Janet Yellen (2017), "Inflation, Uncertainty, and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at "Prospects for Growth: Reassessing the Fundamentals," the 59th annual meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Cleveland, Ohio, September 26.
For October through December of this year, the decline in the Federal Reserve's securities holdings will be capped at $6 billion per month for Treasury securities and $4 billion per month for agency securities.
These caps will gradually rise over the course of the following year to maximums of $30 billion per month for Treasury securities and $20 billion per month for agency securities and will remain in place through the process of normalizing the size of our balance sheet.

At the Panel on Monetary Policy "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference sponsored by the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington D.C.
I enjoyed Ben Bernanke's paper titled "Monetary Policy in a New Era."1 He presents a compelling diagnosis of the issues facing policymakers and discusses a variety of policy options.
Bernanke proposes an approach to policy that is elegant and straightforward to communicate.
Policymakers in advanced economies are confronting a different constellation of challenges today than those that dominated the canon of U.S.
monetary policymaking over the previous half-century, which I refer to as the "new normal."3 A key feature of the new normal is that the neutral interest rate--the level of the federal funds rate that is consistent with the economy growing close to its potential rate, full employment, and stable inflation--appears to be much lower than it was in the decades prior to the crisis.
In the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the median FOMC participant expected a longer-run real federal funds rate, after subtracting inflation, of 3/4 percent, down sharply from the value the first time the policy projection was published in the January 2012 SEP of 2-1/4 percent--and the average value in the decades prior to the financial crisis of 2-1/2 percent.4
The low level of the neutral rate limits the amount of space available for cutting the federal funds rate to offset adverse developments and thereby can be expected to increase the frequency and duration of periods when the policy rate is constrained by the effective lower bound, unemployment is elevated, and inflation is below target.
In this environment, frequent or extended periods of low inflation run the risk of pulling down private-sector inflation expectations, which could amplify the degree and persistence of shortfalls of inflation, thereby making future lower bound episodes even more challenging in terms of output and employment losses.
To the extent it is weighing on longer-run inflation expectations, the persistently low level of the neutral federal funds rate may be a factor contributing to the persistent shortfall of U.S.
Further complicating the ability of central banks to achieve their inflation objectives in today's new normal is the very flat Phillips curve observed in the United States and many other advanced economies, which makes the relationship between labor market conditions and price inflation more tenuous.
For instance, inflation has remained stubbornly below the FOMC's 2 percent target for the past five years even as unemployment has fallen from 8.2 percent to 4.2 percent, a level that most experts believe is in the vicinity of full employment.6
Bernanke's paper provides an excellent review of the Federal Reserve's efforts to operate in this new environment and makes some interesting new proposals.
Reflecting on the Fed's available "policy toolbox," Bernanke concludes that the available tools are not likely to be sufficient and proposes a framework that relies on forward guidance with commitment to help central banks achieve their inflation and employment objectives.
The academic literature on monetary policy suggests a variety of prescriptions for preventing a lower neutral rate of interest from eroding longer-run inflation expectations.
For instance, raising the inflation target sufficiently to provide meaningfully greater policy space could engender public discomfort or, at the other extreme, risk unmooring inflation expectations.
As I have noted previously, the persistence of the shortfall in inflation from our objective is an important consideration for monetary policy.7 The makeup principle, in which policy would make up for past misses of the inflation target, is not reflected in most standard monetary policy frameworks, although it is an important precept in theory.8 Some of the proposals that have been advanced to implement this principle present some difficulties.
For example, while price-level targeting would be helpful in the aftermath of a recession that puts the economy at the effective lower bound, it could require tightening into a negative supply shock, which is a very unattractive feature, as Bernanke points out.9
Bernanke proposes a framework that avoids this undesirable possibility by implementing a temporary price-level targeting framework only in periods where conventional policy is constrained by the lower bound.
Bernanke's proposal thus has the advantage of maintaining standard practice in normal times while proposing a makeup policy in periods when the policy rate is limited by the lower bound and inflation is below target.
His proposed temporary price-level target would delay the liftoff of the policy rate from the lower bound until the average inflation over the entire lower bound episode has reached 2 percent and full employment is achieved.
This type of policy, which would result in temporary overshooting of the inflation target in order to make up for the previous period of undershooting, is designed to, in Bernanke's words, "calibrate the vigor of the policy response...to the severity of the episode."
The proposed temporary price-level targeting policy is designed to address what I see as one of the key challenges facing policymakers.
Following deep recessions of the type we experienced in 2008-09, there appears to be an important premium on "normalization." This was apparent in 2010, for instance, when there was substantial pressure among Group of Twenty officials to commit to timelines and targets for reducing fiscal support and to articulate exit principles for monetary policy.10 This inclination proved premature, as was evident from the subsequent intensification of the euro-area crisis.
Moreover, the benchmark for "normal" tends to be defined in terms of pre-crisis standards that involved policy settings well away from the lower bound, at least initially, because it may take some time to learn about important changes in underlying financial and economic relationships.
For example, the factors underlying what we now understand to be the new normal of persistently low interest rates were in many cases initially viewed as temporary headwinds.
In these circumstances, a standard policy framework calibrated around the pre-crisis or "old" normal may be biased to underachieving the inflation target in a low neutral rate environment.
The kind of policy framework that Bernanke proposes, which pre-commits to implementing the makeup principle based on the actual observed performance of inflation during a lower bound episode, could guard against premature liftoff and help prevent the erosion of longer-term inflation expectations.
Monetary policymakers operate in an environment of considerable uncertainty and therefore have to weigh the risks of tightening too little or too late against those of tightening too much or too soon.
policymakers to be highly attentive to the risks associated with a breakout of inflation to the upside, as in the 1970s, they balance these risks against those associated with undershooting the inflation target persistently, as in Japan in the late 1990s and the 2000s.
In weighing these risks, the standard approach is typically designed to achieve "convergence from below," in which inflation gradually rises to its target.
Given the lags in the effects of monetary policy, convergence from below would necessitate raising interest rates preemptively, well in advance of inflation reaching its target.
Moreover, particularly in the early stage of a recovery, this kind of preemptive approach tends of necessity to rely on economic relationships derived from pre-crisis observations, when policy rates were comfortably above the lower bound.
During a period when the policy rate is limited by the lower bound, Bernanke's proposal would represent a substantial departure from the standard approach.
While a standard policy framework would tend to prescribe that tightening should start preemptively, well before inflation reaches target, Bernanke's temporary price-level target proposal would imply maintaining the policy rate at the lower bound well past the point at which inflation has risen above target.
In principle, policymakers would have to be willing to accept elevated rates of above-target inflation for a period following a lengthy period of undershooting.
Just as policymakers could run a risk of low inflation becoming entrenched in the standard preemptive framework, so, too, there are risks in the temporary price-level target framework.
One risk is that the public, seeing elevated rates of inflation, may start to doubt that the central bank is still serious about its inflation target.
It is worth noting that the policy is motivated by the opposite concern--that convergence from below, following an extended lower bound episode, may lead to an unanchoring of inflation expectations to the downside.
Still, a conscious policy of overshooting may be difficult to calibrate, especially since the large confidence intervals around inflation forecasts suggest that the risks of an undesired overshooting are nontrivial.
A related risk is that the central bank would lose its nerve: Maintaining the interest rate at zero in the face of a strong economy and inflation notably above its target would place a central bank in uncomfortable territory.
One additional challenge of the proposed framework is specifying a path for the policy rate immediately following liftoff that smoothly and gradually eases inflation back down to target and facilitates a gradual adjustment of the labor market.
In the proposed framework, once the cumulative average rate of inflation during the lower-bound period has reached the target of 2 percent, policy would revert to a standard policy rule.11 This implies that a standard policy rule would kick in at a point when inflation is above target and the economy is at or beyond full employment.
Even with a smoothing (inertial) property, a standard policy rule could result in a relatively sharp path of tightening, and the anticipation of the steep post-liftoff rate path itself could undo some of the benefits associated with the framework.
Thus, there would likely need to be a transitional framework to guide policy initially post-liftoff that might make both communications and policy somewhat more complicated.
The temporary price-level targeting framework proposed by Bernanke is appealing on a conceptual level because it proposes a simple and clear mechanism to help policymakers deal with the challenges posed by the lower bound on the policy rate in an environment of uncertainty.
The reality is more complicated, however, especially if, as the paper suggests, many central banks in advanced economies are likely to operate with an additional tool when the policy rate is constrained.
In the paper, Bernanke cites Chair Yellen's 2016 Jackson Hole speech, which suggests that in a recession, the FOMC could be expected to turn to large-scale asset purchases as well as forward guidance after the federal funds rate is lowered to zero.12
Today, when many central banks in advanced economies are operating with two distinct tools, policymakers consider the effects of the balance sheet as well as the policy rate in their assessment of the extent of accommodation provided by monetary policy.
In the United States, from the time tapering was first discussed to the September 2017 meeting, when the path for balance sheet runoff was adopted, FOMC minutes and statements suggest that participants considered the degree of accommodation provided by both policy tools in their discussions of the sequencing and timing of changes to policy settings.
Discussions about the sequencing of "normalization" and the delay of balance sheet runoff "until normalization of the level of the federal funds rate is well under way" effectively consider the extent to which maintaining the balance sheet may continue to provide makeup support for the economy while enabling the policy rate to escape the lower bound earlier than otherwise in a low neutral rate environment.
As Bernanke acknowledges, now that many central banks have developed playbooks specifying the operational modalities associated with asset purchases, and there is some familiarity with their effects on asset prices and financial conditions, there is a greater likelihood that asset purchases would become a part of the policy reaction function, along with forward guidance, during lower-bound episodes.
Yet, as I have noted previously in the international context, asset purchases can complicate policy frameworks and communications, because their deployment and withdrawal has tended to be discontinuous and discrete and thus may be associated with greater uncertainty about the policy reaction function.13 It appears the public closely follows statements about both the policy rate and asset purchases to glean possible information about the future overall stance of monetary policy.
This suggests there may be benefits in communications and predictability of a unified policy framework across the tools that is more predictable and continuous.
Relatedly, one helpful elaboration of the framework Bernanke proposes might be to incorporate a unified measure, or shadow rate, that would capture the degree of policy accommodation provided through the combined settings of both asset purchases and the policy rate.14
Moving away from the policy proposal in the paper, there are two other aspects of a low neutral rate world that I want to touch on briefly: cross-border spillovers and financial imbalances.
The new normal appears to be characterized by low neutral rates and a weak relationship between overall inflation and unemployment not only in the United States, but also in many other advanced economies with lower-bound episodes likely to be more prevalent.
Given available data, it is difficult to disentangle whether the heightened cross-border feedback effects are attributable to the low level of neutral rates, particular features of today's lower-bound episodes, or the interaction of the policies adopted by many central banks.
In any case, recent Federal Reserve staff analysis suggests that cross-border spillovers have increased notably since the crisis and are quite large.
For instance, European Central Bank policy news that leads to a 10 basis point decrease in the German 10-year term premium is associated with a roughly 5 basis point decrease in the U.S.
Moreover, news about policy rates and term premiums appears to have quite different effects on exchange rates, such that the ordering of policy normalization can have important implications for exchange rates and associated financial conditions, as I discussed earlier this year.17 Recent staff estimates suggest that news about expected changes in the policy rate tends to have a large spillover through the exchange rate, whereas news about changes in term premiums tends to lead to corresponding cross-border changes in term premiums, as discussed previously, with much smaller effects on the exchange rate.
Moreover, the exchange rate effect of changes in short-term rates is much greater than it was pre-crisis.
For instance, policy news that leads to a 25 basis point increase in the expected interest rate portion of the 10‑year Treasury yield is associated with a roughly 3 percentage point appreciation in the dollar, which is three times greater than the response pre-crisis.
term premiums has a muted effect on the exchange rate both now and pre-crisis.
Finally, a low neutral rate environment may also be associated with a heightened risk of asset price bubbles, which could exacerbate the tradeoff for monetary policy between achieving the traditional dual-mandate goals and preventing the kinds of imbalances that could contribute to financial instability.
Standard asset-valuation models suggest that a persistently low neutral rate, depending on the factors driving it, could lead to higher ratios of asset prices to underlying income flows--for example, higher ratios of prices to earnings for stocks or higher prices of buildings relative to rents.
If asset markets were highly efficient and participants had excellent foresight, this would not necessarily lead to imbalances.
However, to the extent that financial markets extrapolate price movements, markets may not transition smoothly to asset valuations that reflect underlying fundamentals but may instead evidence periods of overshooting.18 Such forces may have played a role in both the stock market boom that ended in the bust of 2001 and the house price bubble that burst in 2007-09.
The risks of such financial imbalances may be greater in the context of the kind of explicit inflation target overshooting policies proposed in the paper.
Again, if market participants were perfectly rational, overshooting policies would not likely pose financial stability risks.
But the combination of low interest rates and low unemployment that would prevail during the inflation overshooting period could well spark capital markets to overextend, leading to financial imbalances.
Macroprudential tools are the preferred first line of defense to address such financial imbalances, which should in principle enable monetary policy to focus on price stability and macroeconomic stabilization.
But the development and deployment of macroprudential tools is still relatively untested in the U.S.
Although important research suggests that the situations under which monetary policy should take financial imbalances into account are likely to be very rare, some recent research has pointed out that the case in favor of taking financial imbalances into account is strengthened when the consequences of financial crises are long lasting.19 In this case, another complication of a persistently low neutral rate may be a sharper tradeoff between achieving the traditional dual-mandate objectives and avoiding financial stability risks, which may make it even more difficult to achieve our price-stability objective.
"Monetary Policy for a New Era," paper prepared for "Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy," a conference held at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, October 12.
"Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1.
"What Happened to the Great Divergence?" speech delivered at the 2016 U.S.
"The 'New Normal' and What It Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Foreign Affairs, Chicago, September 12.
"Cross-Border Spillovers of Balance Sheet Normalization," speech delivered at the National Bureau of Economic Research's Monetary Economics Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 13.
"Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, September 5.
"What Have They Been Thinking? Homebuyer Behavior in Hot and Cold Markets (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp.
"The Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"Leaning against the Wind When Credit Bites Back," International Journal of Central Banking, September.
"The Tradeoffs in Leaning against the Wind (PDF)," paper presented at the 17th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 3.
"International Spillovers from Conventional and Unconventional Monetary Policy," IFDP Notes.
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-080.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Documentation for Measures of Monetary Policy (PDF)," Reserve Bank of New Zealand Working Paper.
"The Risk-Adjusted Monetary Policy Rule (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-061.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
"Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Measuring the Macroeconomic Impact of Monetary Policy at the Zero Lower Bound," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"The Federal Reserve's Monetary Policy Toolkit: Past, Present, and Future," speech at "Designing Resilient Monetary Policy Frameworks for the Future," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyoming, August 26.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
The well-known Laubach-Williams model currently suggests an estimate of the longer-run neutral federal funds rate that is close to zero.
The latest estimates are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's website at http://www.frbsf.org/economic-research/files/Laubach_Williams_updated_estimates.xlsx.
Over the 1960-2007 period, the real federal funds rate--measured as the nominal federal funds rate less trailing four-quarter core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation--averaged 2-1/2 percent.
The inflation information refers to core PCE inflation measured on a 12-month average basis.
As Bernanke notes, one way to avoid this feature is to adopt "flexible price-level targeting," in which policy takes into account resource utilization as well as the deviation of the price level from its target.
Kiley and Roberts (2017) examine a form of flexible price-level targeting—which they refer to as a "shadow rate rule"—and find that it performs well.
The 2010 G-20 Toronto communiqué indicated that advanced economies "committed to fiscal plans that will at least halve deficits by 2013 and stabilize or reduce government debt-to-GDP ratios by 2016." The document is available on the U.S.

At TMPG Best Practices @ 10: A Look Back and a Look Ahead, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York
I am honored to join you to celebrate the first 10 years of the Treasury Market Practices Group (TMPG).
The TMPG has become an essential forum where industry participants gather under the auspices of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York to address market practice issues as they arise in the fast evolving markets for Treasury securities.
Outside this room, you are competitors, and that vigorous competition serves your firms, your customers, and ultimately the U.S.
The TMPG is the place where market participants recognize and address their responsibilities to each other.
I know that they take that responsibility seriously, and I encourage all of the market participants here today to take the TMPG's recommendations just as seriously and to adopt them as best practices that will enhance the market's functioning.
These markets made national headlines when we learned that a Salomon Brothers' trader had repeatedly circumvented Treasury auction rules to corner the market for the on-the-run two-year Treasury.
As it became clear that Salomon's senior management had known about the issue for several months without alerting regulators, the scandal threatened to bring down one of the largest financial firms of that time.
Over one memorable August weekend, we first prohibited the firm from dealing in government securities on behalf of customers, and then reduced that sanction as top Salomon management left the firm and Warren Buffett, then a large Salomon shareholder, agreed to assume the chairmanship of the board of directors.
After the dust settled, we had to grapple with the wider implications of the scandal for the market itself and particularly the role of regulatory oversight.
Our recommendations were summarized in a joint report to the Congress issued by the Treasury Department, the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), and the Federal Reserve Board.
Among the issues we considered were how to encourage a level playing field for all market participants, and when and where regulators should respond to the periodic technical difficulties the market sometimes experienced.
The sale of Treasury bonds, notes, and bills finances the U.S.
government, and those securities are in turn a primary vehicle for savings for a wide range of U.S.
Treasury securities are also an important source of collateral within the financial system.
This last role has become all the more critical in recent years as regulations have required banks to hold larger amounts of high-quality liquid assets so that they can safely meet their potential liquidity needs.
It was important to make the auction system more robust to potential manipulation, and we made several recommendations to do so and to open up the process to greater competition.
However, in other areas that already worked well, we chose, for example, to open up issuance of securities that were in short supply (or "squeezed") when needed rather than to risk negatively affecting the functioning of Treasury markets by instituting more invasive regulation.
There is certainly a role for regulation, but regulation should always take into account the impact that it has on markets--a balance that must be constantly weighed.
There is also a role for a body such as the TMPG to address market problems.
The TMPG's approach to "fails" in the Treasury and mortgage-backed securities markets provides a good example.
If the practice were to become too frequent, then it could seriously impair market functioning.
But at the same time, it doesn't make sense to simply outlaw the practice, since that limits flexibility in a way that may not always be called for and would likely reduce market liquidity.
The TMPG also plays an important role in helping to "fill in the cracks" between the competing regulations that various Treasury market participants face.
Many different institutions and individuals depend on these markets, and the regulatory system reflects that.
The Government Securities Act gave the Treasury Department some rulemaking authority over all government securities brokers and dealers.
But the act also required these firms to register with the SEC.
At the same time, the Federal Reserve regulates many of the banks that are active in these markets, and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York also plays an essential role, both as fiscal agent for the U.S.
government and, by nature of its frequent activity in these markets, in conducting monetary policy operations.
The agencies work well together, but there is real value in having an industry group help to identify issues that cross regulatory boundaries.
First, in 2016, the TMPG conducted a study of financial benchmarks and uncovered uses of ICAP's federal funds open rate that had not previously been well understood.2 As ICAP decided to stop publishing the rate, the TMPG also helped to guide market participants to an alternative that is aligned with the International Organizations of Securities Commissions Principles for Financial Benchmarks while steering the market away from the London Interbank Offered Rate (LIBOR) as a potential alternative--a move that now seems prescient given the subsequent news around the long-run risks to LIBOR.
More recently, the TMPG has been busy creating a map of clearing and settlement in Treasury markets, work that I am sure all of the regulatory agencies will find to be of great interest.
As regulators, we fully support your work, and will continue to make sure that our own rules support these markets.
The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority's (FINRA's) new collection of the Treasury transactions of its members through its Trade Reporting and Compliance Engine, or TRACE system, will do much to improve the regulatory agencies' understanding of the dynamics of this market.
But as in the past, we should also be concerned about creating a level playing field.
For that reason, the Board of Governors is continuing to negotiate with FINRA for it to act as our agent in collecting similar data from banks.
We do not want to create a regulatory arbitrage where the same activity done within a broker-dealer is treated differently than when it is done within a bank.
The TMPG and similar groups around the world play an important role by helping both regulators and industry leaders address market concerns before they threaten market function.
The ICAP Fed Funds Open rate was a daily indicator published by ICAP, a broker in the federal funds market, as to where a representative federal fund transaction would be priced at the start of the U.S.
ICAP did not consider the rate to be International Organizations of Securities Commissions compliant, although it was nonetheless used as a financial benchmark by some market participants.

At Community Banking in the 21st Century Fifth Annual Community Banking Research and Policy Conference cosponsored by the Federal Reserve System and Conference of State Bank Supervisors, Federal Reserve Bank of St.
I am very glad to welcome everyone here to this conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve System and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors.
Since the first of these gatherings five years ago, this research and policy conference has established itself as an important event where industry leaders, academics, and supervisors discuss the latest research and exchange ideas about promoting a healthy and growing community banking industry.
All of us share an interest in seeing that community banks continue their vital role in their customers' lives and in a strong and stable U.S.
The Fed has been working hard to ensure that its regulation and supervision of banks are tailored appropriately to the size, complexity, and role different institutions play in the financial system.
For community banks, which by and large avoided the risky business practices that contributed to the financial crisis, we have been focused on making sure that much-needed improvements to regulation and supervision since the crisis are appropriate and not unduly burdensome.
One way we are doing this is through the regulatory review required by the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act, known as EGRPRA.
The first step we took, pursuant to EGRPRA, was to listen to industry and others with a stake in how community banks are supervised, which was accomplished through soliciting written comments and by holding six outreach meetings in 2014 and 2015.
Our EGRPRA report, issued in March, was focused on community banks, and it noted steps that had already taken place, for example, to simplify Call Report requirements and expand the number of firms eligible for less frequent examinations.
Since that report, the Board of Governors, along with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, has proposed a rule expanding the number of commercial real estate transactions that will no longer require an appraisal, allowing for a less detailed evaluation.
And just last week, the Fed, along with other regulators, took a significant step to reduce the regulatory burden on community banks and other smaller and less complex institutions by proposing to simplify several requirements in the regulatory capital rule.
We have done this because we have an abiding commitment to consider how our decisions affect institutions and the customers they serve.
We are well aware that community banks serve communities, businesses, and households that are often underserved by larger institutions and offer more extensive and more personalized services than are often otherwise available.
We know that community bankers are part of the communities they serve, and they are often better able to understand the needs and the aspirations of their customers.
We hope that the research presented at this conference stimulates discussion about the leading policy issues facing the industry and supervisors.
As in the past, I see that this year's agenda includes presentations related to several important issues, including the effect of supervision on risk-tasking and the effects of greater competition on community banks.
I am cheered to see that finance students at the University of Akron remain interested enough in community banking to participate in a case-study competition related to community banking, and I am pleased that the conference will hear a presentation of the winning case study.
In closing, let me thank the conference organizers with the Fed and the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, the scholars and others making presentations, and all of you for attending.

At "20 Years On," a conference sponsored by the Bank of England, London, England
Vice Chairman Fischer updated his remarks to elaborate on topics raised at the Bank of England conference for which the speech was originally prepared.
It is a pleasure to speak at this commemoration of 20 years of Bank of England monetary policy independence.
In my remarks today, I will consider how central banking in the United Kingdom and the United States has evolved in response to the challenges of recent years.
In the first part, I will discuss several aspects of aggregate monetary policy: central bank independence, policy transparency, and policy tools.
In the second part, I consider differences between the approaches of the two banks to their lender-of-last-resort function.
And, third, I will close with brief reflections on the central bank's responsibility for financial stability.
We start by considering a central bank that influences economic activity only through its influence over the general level of interest rates.2 More than two decades ago, Guy Debelle and I offered two terms--goal independence and instrument independence--to describe such a central bank's degree of independence.
Our definitions were as follows: "A central bank has goal independence when it is free to set the final goals of monetary policy.
A bank that has instrument independence is free to choose the means by which it seeks to achieve its goals."3 In May 1997, the Bank of England achieved instrument independence--something the Federal Reserve had already long had.4
Under the new law, the Bank of England's Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), rather than the Treasury, set the policy interest rate.
Inflation targeting, which began in the United Kingdom in 1992, continued under the new system and was codified in the Bank of England Act of 1998.5 The MPC was given an explicit numerical inflation target, corresponding to effective price stability, alongside an implied stabilization goal for real economic activity.6 Consequently, the Bank of England from 1997 had the combination that Debelle and I advocated: instrument independence but not goal independence.
We also judged that the vagueness of the Federal Reserve's statutory objectives meant that the Federal Reserve "has considerable goal independence."7 Today both the FOMC and the MPC have a numerical inflation goal--2 percent.
In the United Kingdom, the Chancellor of the Exchequer sets the MPC's inflation target: currently 2 percent per year for the U.K.
consumer price index.8 In the United States, in the FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, first issued in 2012 and discussed annually, Committee participants have judged that the longer-run inflation objective that corresponds to the Federal Reserve's mandate is a rate of 2 percent per year, as measured by the change in the price index for personal consumption expenditures.9
In practice there is little difference between the policy goals of the two central banks, or between the variables that are targeted.
But there is a subtle difference between them in terms of who sets the inflation target.
To date, that difference has not generated any major divergence between the approaches to monetary policy of the two central banks.
Although much has changed in central banking since the 1990s, the case for instrument independence and against goal independence remains sound.
The goals of monetary policy should be set by the central government, as is the case in both the United States and the United Kingdom.
We all know what the goals of the Bank of England and the Fed are: For both, the goals are stability of the price level and full employment.
Although there is a hint of a lexicographic ordering in favor of the rate of inflation in the Bank of England's mandate, the Federal Reserve's dual mandate unambiguously places equal weight on both goals.
Across the world, there seems to be a preference for inflation either to be the only goal variable or to be lexicographically emphasized over unemployment.
There is no central bank that--in Mervyn King's terminology--is an "inflation nutter."10
Instrument independence is necessary because, without it, the central bank is unable to set the stance of monetary policy that it believes to be most consistent with achievement of the statutory mandate.
That said, there are, to be sure, degrees of instrument independence, and one can easily envisage central banks with considerable instrument independence whose actions on their instruments are constrained by law or by decisions by the treasury.
For example, in a country that has committed its central bank to enforce an exchange rate band (with the exchange rate free to move within the band), the central bank will not be fully instrument independent, though it may have a substantial amount of independence with respect to the precise settings of the policy interest rate and other monetary tools.
Historically, central banks were frequently created to finance public spending.
However, these banks--such as those in Sweden and the United Kingdom--were later sometimes given their operational independence in part to create a greater separation of monetary policy from fiscal policy--in particular, in order to ensure that they would not be vulnerable to pressure to finance the government budget (that is, to monetize public spending).
Around the world, the fear of the central bank losing its ability to meet its price stability goal may well have been the prime reason for governments to implement instrument independence.11
Fundamentally, however, central bank instrument independence is desirable because monetary policy is an esoteric and complicated art or science, involving technical judgments that have economy-wide and often long-lasting consequences: A separate institution is needed to manage and take responsibility for monetary policy.
Central banks have over the years--in some cases over a few centuries--amassed an expertise and developed a character that makes them the natural candidates to perform the functions expected of such institutions.
As the Governor of the Riksbank has observed, the most important skill and reputation that a central bank needs is one of reliability.12 That is, both the central government and the general public should be confident that their central bank can be relied on to deliver a stable price level and close to full employment, along with financial stability.
If such independent institutions did not exist, we would have to invent them; if they exist and perform well, the country is blessed; and if they exist and perform badly, they need to be reformed--by a change in the laws by which they are governed, by changes in their structure, or by changes in personnel--and sometimes all of the above.
In a paper written for the Bank of England's tercentenary, I considered how an instrument-independent central bank might conduct itself.13 My discussion noted that an independent central bank should adhere to the "principle of accountability to the public of those who make critically important policy decisions."14 Accountability, in the senses I defined it, included the requirement "to explain and justify its policies to the legislature and the public"--that is, policy transparency and communications.15 Transparency, public accountability, and policy communications form the quid pro quo of central bank independence, and they can also contribute to achievement of macroeconomic goals.
These were points the FOMC recognized in its Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy, which observed that clarity concerning policy decisions "increases the effectiveness of monetary policy, and enhances transparency and accountability, which are essential in a democratic society." In my coverage of these issues today, however, I would like to concentrate on the Bank of England, which in the past quarter-century has been an innovator in several ways with regard to accountability and transparency.
monetary policy and the Bank of England's monetary actions predated independence.
For example, in the late 1950s, Richard Sayers observed: "It may not be wise to turn the central bank into a goldfish bowl, but at least some relaxation of the traditional secretiveness would make for better health in the nation's monetary affairs."16 And some Bank communications vehicles, such as the economic analysis in the Quarterly Bulletin and testimony and speeches by the Governor and other Bank officials, were of long standing by the mid-1990s.
But the Bank of England made further strides toward improved transparency and communications during the 1990s.
From the beginning, the Inflation Report was intended to increase transparency about the U.K.
monetary policy reaction function--that is, the connection between policy instruments and economic variables, including the goal variables.17 After independence, the Inflation Report presented the MPC's inflation forecast.
Furthermore, alongside other Bank statements, the Inflation Report provides a publicly available analysis of the economy and of economic implications of developments like Brexit.
The Bank expanded its policy communications after 1997, publishing MPC analogues to the FOMC releases (some of them only recent innovations by the Fed), namely, postmeeting MPC statements and meeting minutes.
And an innovation of Mervyn King in the early years of inflation targeting that has continued in the era of independence is the Inflation Report press conference.
Here, senior Bank figures discuss the MPC's forecast and the state of the economy.
This innovation was a forerunner of the Federal Reserve Chair's press conference, begun in 2011, in which the Chair describes the latest policy decision together with the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) of FOMC participants.
The MPC and FOMC have extensively--particularly in recent years--used two monetary policy tools other than decisions on the current short-term interest rate.
Monetary authorities used to be reluctant to discuss the future course of the policy rate.20 By 1997, however, there was widespread recognition of the merits of clarity on the reaction function and of having long-term interest rates incorporate accurate expectations of future policy.
These considerations led to the FOMC's use of forward guidance regarding the short-term interest rate in its postmeeting statements during the mid-2000s.
Beginning in 2008, with the policy rate at or near its lower bound, regular forward guidance acquired new efficacy.22 Through forward guidance, additional accommodation from short-term interest rate policy could be provided by lengthening the period over which the policy rate was expected to remain at its lower bound.
The knowledge that the short-term policy rate likely would be lower for longer would put downward pressure on longer-term rates.
The FOMC has provided forward guidance on the policy rate in its postmeeting statements ever since the target federal funds rate was brought to the lower bound in December 2008.
In addition, the SEP shows individual FOMC participants' expectations regarding the policy rate, though it does not identify the individuals in the interest rate dot plot.
In the United Kingdom, the MPC started providing forward guidance in its postmeeting statements in 2013.23
As the policy rate--Bank Rate--is still at its lower bound in the United Kingdom, it remains to be seen whether MPC forward guidance will continue during policy firming.
For its part, the FOMC has provided forward guidance in its policy statements during the tightening phase that began with the increase in the target range for the federal funds rate in December 2015.
I expect that the Bank of England will also likely continue to use forward guidance when it begins to raise the policy interest rate above its effective lower bound.
Asset purchases are less of a new tool than forward guidance.
authorities sporadically attempted to influence long-term interest rates directly by transacting in longer-term Treasury securities.
By 1997, however, monetary policy operations in longer-term securities markets had fallen into disuse.24 The financial crisis changed matters, with both countries' central banks expanding their balance sheets through large-scale purchases of longer-dated securities to put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates and set in motion movements in asset prices and borrowing costs that would stimulate spending by households and businesses.
It is widely, though not universally, recognized that these asset purchases helped contain the economic downturns in the United Kingdom and the United States and underpinned the subsequent recovery in each country.
This experience raises the question of whether the balance sheet will continue to be a routine tool of monetary policy once interest rates normalize.25 The FOMC has indicated its preference that, barring large adverse shocks to the economy, adjustments to the federal funds rate will be the main means of altering the stance of monetary policy.26
The second section concerns the role of the lender of last resort.
The financial crisis and recession confirmed the value of central bank tools that affect the financial system, beyond those most associated with monetary policy.
As of the mid-2000s, the posture of the Bank of England and the Federal Reserve toward the lender-of-last-resort function reflected the principles enunciated by Bagehot and the long absence of a severe financial crisis: The discount rate stood above the key policy rate by a fixed amount; the discount window was not used for macroeconomic stabilization; and depository institutions were the users of the discount window, typically on a short-term basis.27
In 1978, Rudi Dornbusch and I noted that the lender-of-last-resort function should imply that "the central bank steps in to ensure that funds are available to make loans to firms which are perfectly sound but, because of panic, are having trouble raising funds."28 In the financial crisis that started in 2007, wide-ranging measures were taken along these lines.
credit markets, the Federal Reserve made numerous changes to its lending arrangements: The spread of the discount rate over the policy rate was lowered, lending was extended to include loans to nondepository financial institutions, and facilities were created allowing longer maturity of, and broader collateral for, loans than was usual for the central bank.29
After its own experience during the financial crisis, the Bank of England permanently widened lender-of-last-resort access to include not only commercial banks, but also other systemically important financial institutions.30 In the United States, the discount rate has for several years been back to its normal relationship with the policy rate, and the special lending facilities have long since been wound up.
Emergency lending facilities of the type seen during the financial crisis remain feasible, if needed, though their usage has not been incorporated into the Federal Reserve's routine lender-of-last-resort powers, along the lines of the changes seen in the United Kingdom.
Instead, the restriction on their deployment has been tightened by requiring approval by the U.S.
Discount window lending puts public funds at risk--though I stress that the Federal Reserve's lending during the crisis did not, in fact, lead to any losses.
The lender of last resort is also a less impersonal, and more allocative, device than aggregate monetary policy tools, because it involves direct lending by the central bank instead of an attempt by monetary policy to alter the overall cost of private-sector borrowing.
For these reasons, the lender-of-last-resort function is bound to be more rule driven than interest rate policy, and it is inevitably associated with collateral arrangements and other safeguards to protect against losses and with strict eligibility criteria.
Our third and final section concerns the financial stability responsibility of the central bank.
Until 1997, the Bank of England had wide supervisory and regulatory powers.
With the reforms of the late 1990s, the Bank had a deputy governor responsible for financial stability, but regulatory powers were largely moved to a different institution, the Financial Services Authority (FSA).
A decade later, the financial crisis demonstrated that financial imbalances can ultimately endanger macroeconomic stability and highlighted the need for enhanced central bank oversight of the financial system.
In the post-crisis era, the FSA became two separate regulatory authorities, one of which--the Prudential Regulation Authority, created in 2012--is part of the Bank of England.
In effect, regulatory powers have largely returned to the Bank.
It is fair to say that the Bank was initially glad to cede many of its financial powers, but that it was later even more glad to have those powers restored.
Financial supervision has also been reformed in the United States in light of the crisis.
The Federal Reserve, which always had regulatory powers, received enhanced authority and devoted more resources to financial stability.31 In both countries, it remains the case that not all financial stability responsibilities rest with the central bank--so it is less independent in this area than in monetary policy proper--and the central bank's tools for achieving financial stability are still being refined.
Indeed, as I have noted previously, a major concern of mine is that the U.S.
The Federal Reserve and the Bank of England benefit from each other's experience as they develop and improve arrangements to meet their financial stability responsibilities.
One major innovation that deserves mention is that the Bank of England has two policy committees: Alongside the MPC is the Financial Policy Committee (FPC).
First, not all of a central bank's responsibilities typically rest with its monetary committee.
This is true not only of the Bank of England, but also of the Federal Reserve: Our financial regulatory authority resides in the Board of Governors, not the FOMC.
Second, aggregate monetary policy tools--typically, one is talking of the policy interest rate--are often blunt weapons against financial imbalances, so deploying them might produce a conflict between financial stability and short-term economic stabilization.
Macroprudential tools may be more direct and more appropriate for fostering financial stability.33 Third, financial policy might need less frequent adjustment than monetary policy.
Perhaps reflecting this judgment, the FPC meets on a quarterly basis, which contrasts with the MPC's eight meetings a year.34 The lower frequency of meetings may also reflect the desirability of a relatively stable regulatory structure; financial tools likely should not be as continuously data dependent as monetary policy tools.
institutional framework for the preservation of financial stability has much to be said for it.
But it also seems clear that there is no uniquely optimal set-up of the framework for the maintenance of financial stability that is independent of the size and scale of the financial system of the country or of its political and financial history.
It has been more than 20 years since the Bank of England celebrated its 300th birthday with a conference focused on central bank independence.
Since then, central banks' operating frameworks have undergone substantial changes, many in response to the financial crisis.
But the case for monetary policy independence set out in the 1990s remains sound, and monetary policy independence is now widely accepted in the United Kingdom, as it long has been in the United States.
It is also clear that central bank responsibilities other than policy rate decisions--specifically, the lender-of-last-resort function and financial stability--are closely connected with monetary policy and that these responsibilities play a prominent role in macroeconomic stabilization.
Let me conclude by observing that, while the crisis and its aftermath motivated central banks to reappraise and adapt their tools, institutions, and thinking, future challenges will doubtless prompt further reforms.35 Or, if I may be permitted a few final words on my way out the door, the watchwords of the central banker should be "Semper vigilans," because history and financial markets are masters of the art of surprise, and "Never say never," because you will sometimes find yourself having to do things that you never thought you would.
"Macroeconomic Policy Rules in Theory and Practice," Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, vol.
The Bank of England Act 1998, the Charters of the Bank and Related Documents (PDF).
The Bank of England's Sterling Monetary Framework: Updated June 2015 (PDF).
"Comment on 'Interest Rate Signals and Central Bank Transparency,'" in Richard H.
"Central Bank Independence, Transparency, and Accountability," speech delivered at the Institute for Monetary and Economic Studies International Conference, Bank of Japan, Tokyo, May 25.
"The Effects of the Great Recession on Central Bank Doctrine and Practice," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 56th Economic Conference, Boston, October 18.
"Semiannual Monetary Policy Report to the Congress," statement before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S.
"Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, April 26-27, 2016," press release, May 18.
"Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 14-15, 2017," press release, April 5.
"Statement before the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs, U.S.
House of Representatives, July 26, 1977 (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol.
Letter from the Governor of the Bank of England to the Chancellor of the Exchequer (PDF), February 4.
"Crisis and Responses: The Federal Reserve in the Early Stages of the Financial Crisis," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
Hoogduin, eds., A Framework for Monetary Stability: Papers and Proceedings of an International Conference Organised by De Nederlandsche Bank and the CentER for Economic Research at Amsterdam.
"How Independent Should a Central Bank Be? (PDF)" in Goals, Guidelines, and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers, proceedings of a conference held in North Falmouth, Massachusetts, in June 1994.
Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF), amended effective January 31 (original version adopted effective January 24, 2012).
"Modern Central Banking," in Forrest Capie, Charles Goodhart, Stanley Fischer, and Norbert Schnadt, eds., The Future of Central Banking: The Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England.
"Modern Approaches to Central Banking," NBER Working Paper Series 5064.
"Central Bank Independence," speech delivered at the 2015 Herbert Stein Memorial Lecture, National Economists Club, Washington, November 4.
Economy," speech delivered at "Macroprudential Monetary Policy," 59th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, October 2.
"Monetary Policy and Debt Management in the United Kingdom: Some Historical Viewpoints," in K.
"Remit of the Bank of England (PDF)," letter from the Chancellor of the Exchequer to the Governor of the Bank of England, March 8.
"Changes in UK Monetary Policy: Rules and Discretion in Practice," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"The Inflation Target Ten Years On," Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, vol.
"The Case for Price Stability (PDF)," Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin, vol.
"Bagehot's Dictum in Practice: Formulating and Implementing Policies to Combat the Financial Crisis," in Financial Stability and Macroeconomic Policy, proceedings of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's Annual Economic Symposium.
Kansas City, Mo.: Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, pp.
"Money and Credit: Banking and the Macroeconomy (PDF)," speech delivered at the Monetary Policy and the Markets Conference, London, December 13.
"Forward Guidance by Inflation-Targeting Central Banks." CEPR Discussion Paper 9722.
"Inflation, Uncertainty, and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the 59th Annual Meeting of the National Association for Business Economics, Cleveland, September 26.
I am grateful to Ed Nelson of the Federal Reserve Board for his excellent assistance.
Views expressed in this presentation are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
The implications for monetary policy of central bank actions other than the use of its general monetary policy tools will be considered in the latter parts of this presentation.
monetary policy independence in the post-World War II era dates at least from the Federal Reserve/Treasury Accord of 1951.
I discussed Federal Reserve independence in detail in Fischer (2015a).
See the text of the act in Bank of England (2015a).
Parliament has made a number of amendments to the Bank of England Act 1998--among them a change, in 2016, to the frequency of MPC meetings, from monthly to eight times a year.
From the start of inflation targeting in the United Kingdom in 1992, it was made clear that the authorities, when faced with a situation in which inflation was different from the target rate, would generally not seek to restore inflation to target as quickly as possible.
Rather, they typically would opt for a policy that sought to bring inflation back to target gradually, without unnecessary destabilization of real output.
This approach has continued in the MPC era, as discussed later.
It is an approach consistent with the MPC's remit in the Bank of England Act 1998 to achieve the inflation target through policies consistent with the economic policy of the U.K.
government, "including its objectives for growth and employment." Return to text
For the most recent statement by the Chancellor of the Exchequer on the inflation target to be pursued by the MPC, see Hammond (2017).
In Fischer (2015a), I took the explicit 2 percent longer-run objective as the means by which the FOMC had made its legislated price stability goal operational.
Initially, the argument was that the central bank was needed to prevent inflation from becoming too high; now, the argument is couched in terms of symmetry of the losses from both too-high and too-low inflation.
Much of my discussion was with particular reference to the United Kingdom, and I argued that the Bank of England should receive independence.
The MPC arrangements also require that a letter be written from the Bank Governor to the Chancellor of the Exchequer in the event of an overshoot or undershoot of the inflation target that is in excess of 1 percent.
As well as providing accountability, this arrangement gives the Bank an opportunity to emphasize the longer-term nature of the inflation goal and the consideration given in MPC policy decisions to the stabilization of real economic activity.
For example, Carney (2016) outlined, among other things, "the horizon over which the MPC judges it appropriate to return inflation to the target" and "the trade-off that has been made with regard to inflation and output variability in determining the scale and duration of any expected deviation of inflation from the target." Return to text
In addition to these tools, the MPC has used the Funding for Lending Scheme to boost bank lending.
For example, Federal Reserve Chairman Arthur Burns once noted (Burns, 1977, p.
717): "Federal Reserve officials are extremely careful to avoid any public comment that might suggest or imply some particular outlook for interest rates." In the United Kingdom, in 1981 Chancellor of the Exchequer Geoffrey Howe observed (Howe, 1981) that it was not the authorities' "practice to forecast interest rate movements." Return to text
Although it provides an inflation forecast in the Inflation Report, the MPC does not form an interest rate forecast in conjunction with that inflation forecast.
Instead, its current practice is to report a "CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate expectations" (Bank of England, 2017b, chart 5.1).
The fact that the MPC's Inflation Report forecasts (for real output growth, inflation, and the unemployment rate) condition on market expectations of interest rates is one difference between the MPC forecasts and the FOMC participants' projections that are summarized in the SEP.
Another difference is that the SEP consolidates information on the projections constructed and submitted separately by the individual FOMC participants, while the Inflation Report's economic projections are arrived at collectively by the MPC and are therefore the forecasts of the committee as a whole.
This is another aspect of the differences of behavior between the two monetary committees that is both interesting and possibly important, but for which there is not enough time for a more detailed discussion.
Woodford (2013) provides an analysis of the value of forward guidance under various conditions, including the case in which the policy rate is at its lower bound.
Federal Reserve operations for monetary policy purposes in longer-term securities markets had largely been absent since the Operation Twist experiment of the early 1960s (see, for example, Meltzer (2009, pp.
In the United Kingdom, operations in longer-term securities markets had continued to figure importantly in monetary policy until the mid-1980s, reflecting attempts by the authorities to influence the term structure of interest rates or to control the stock of money or the volume of liquidity (see Fischer (1987), Goodhart (1999), and Batini and Nelson (2005)).
A difference between most of these earlier operations and those in the modern era is that recent years' asset purchases have usually involved an expansion of the central bank's overall balance sheet.
For a recent discussion of the Federal Reserve's position on the matter, see Yellen (2017).
See Bagehot ([1873] 1897) for the classic discussion of the central bank's role as lender of last resort.
This is a very brief and simplified discussion of the actions taken by the Federal Reserve with regard to the discount window during the crisis.
For reasons of space, I will not recount the United Kingdom's policy response in this area during the crisis.
Specifically, the Bank provided access to the largest broker-dealers subject to U.K.
This resource decision led, in 2010, to the creation within the Federal Reserve Board of the Office of Financial Stability Policy and Research (which later became the Division of Financial Stability).
context, see, for example, Bernanke (2011) and Board of Governors (2016).
It is worth noting that the 20-year period that is the focus of these remarks constitutes only a little over 6 percent of the history of the Bank of England--and there certainly have been a lot of surprises during that short period in the history of the second oldest of the world's central banks.

At "Banking and the Economy: A Forum for Minority Bankers," a conference hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri
I would like to thank President George and her staff at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City for inviting me to participate in today's conference, which is a joint effort of the Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Kansas City, Minneapolis, Philadelphia, Richmond, and St.
As you may know, this is the second minority bankers forum hosted by the Federal Reserve System.
Diversity and inclusion are important to the strength of the banking industry, and therefore I am pleased that the Federal Reserve System is sponsoring this conference.
Banks with more diverse workforces are also better able to reach broader groups of customers, especially customers who have historically been underbanked, when they show that serving those customers is a top priority.
As a bank regulator, the Federal Reserve has an interest in promoting diversity in the financial services industry.
For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago is actively engaged in developing diverse talent in the financial services industry as a key partner of the Financial Services Pipeline Initiative (FSP).
The members of this initiative recognize they have a collective interest in developing a diverse pipeline of talent.
Another example of our work to promote diversity at banking institutions is the standards developed by the Board's Office of Minority and Women Inclusion to promote transparency and awareness of diversity policies and practices within banking institutions.
The Board encourages banking institutions not only to provide their policies, practices, and self-assessment information to the Board, but also to disclose this information to the public.
We hope that this new self-assessment tool will help individual banks achieve their own diversity and inclusion goals and contribute to greater diversity in the banking industry more generally.
I also want to take this opportunity to update you on what we are doing to preserve and promote Minority Depository Institutions (MDIs).
Though I know that only some of you work for MDIs, the Federal Reserve recognizes their vital role in serving low- and moderate-income and minority communities as well as bringing diversity to the field of banking.
I make a point of meeting with the leadership of MDIs as I travel around the country so I can hear firsthand about the challenges these institutions face and the important work they are doing to provide financial services to minority and historically underserved populations.
I have heard from CEOs of MDIs about how challenging it can be to simultaneously serve their target market and be a bank of choice in a competitive banking market.
The Federal Reserve has developed a national outreach program called the Partnership for Progress to assist MDIs in confronting business model challenges, cultivating safe banking practices, and competing more efficiently.
We brought to bear the resources of our community development function, which promotes economic growth and financial stability in lower-income communities.
Combining the resources of our banking and supervision staff with our community development staff allows us to be more creative in supporting MDIs around the country.
The resulting new papers, along with another written by economists at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, were presented at the interagency biennial MDI conference this past April in Los Angeles.
Turning to the workforce more broadly, I want to spend some of my time today talking about disparities and share some findings from a conference we hosted yesterday at the Board titled "Disparities in the Labor Market: What Are We Missing?" In fulfilling its dual mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has set a target of 2 percent for inflation but does not have a similarly fixed numerical goal for maximum employment.
That is because the level of maximum employment depends on "nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market," which "may change over time and may not be directly measurable."3 Understanding how close the labor market is to our full-employment goal requires consulting a variety of evidence along with a healthy dose of judgment.
This approach to maximum employment has allowed the FOMC to navigate the current expansion in a way that has likely brought more people back into productive employment than might have been the case with a fixed unemployment rate target based on pre-crisis standards.
The Federal Reserve is also keenly interested in disparities in employment, labor force participation, income, and wealth because they may have implications for the growth capacity of the economy.
When we consider appropriate monetary policy, we need to have a good sense of how fast the economy can grow without fueling excessive price inflation.
At a time when the retirement of the baby-boom generation looks likely to be something of a drag on the growth of the labor force, it is especially important to consider whether relatively low levels of employment and labor force participation for some prime working-age groups represent slack that, if successfully tapped, could increase the labor force and boost economic activity.
More broadly, when a person who was previously unemployed or discouraged secures a job, not only does it boost the economy, but that person also may gain a greater sense of economic security, self-sufficiency, and self-worth and be better able to invest in their family's future.
With a richer understanding of economic or social barriers that inhibit labor market success and prosperity for some groups, we may better grasp how much these individuals can be helped by broad economic expansion and how much targeted intervention is required through other policy means.4
There is also an important connection between the economy's potential growth rate and equality of opportunity.
To the extent that disparities in income and wealth across race, ethnicity, gender, or geography reflect such disparities in opportunity, families and small businesses from the disadvantaged groups will then underinvest in education or business endeavors, and potential growth will fall short of the levels it might otherwise attain.5
Aside from reducing the long-run productive potential of the economy, persistently high levels of income and wealth inequality may also have implications for the robustness of consumer spending, which accounts for roughly two-thirds of aggregate spending in the United States.
For example, results from the Federal Reserve's latest Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), which is due to be released soon, indicate that the share of income held by the top 1 percent of households reached 24 percent in 2015, up from 17 percent in 1988.
When we disaggregate the economy-wide labor market statistics, we find significant and persistent racial and ethnic disparities.8 In August, the national unemployment rate of 4.4 percent, which is low by historical standards, masked substantial differences across different demographic groups.
As shown in figure 1, unemployment rates ranged from 3.9 percent for whites to 4 percent for Asians, 5.2 percent for Hispanics, and 7.7 percent for African Americans.
Labor force participation rates, shown in figure 2, also differ substantially, although by less than unemployment rates, with the rate for African Americans lowest at 62.2 percent.
Even more striking, a significant portion of the gaps in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups cannot be attributed to differences in their underlying characteristics, such as age and education levels.9
Although the differences in employment rates between racial and ethnic groups are still quite large, they have narrowed recently, after having widened considerably during the recession, and are near their lowest levels in decades.
Differences in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups tend to widen sharply during recessions, as less advantaged groups shoulder an outsized share of total layoffs, and these differences shrink during recoveries.
For example, in the second quarter of 2017, the unemployment rate for black adult men was a little more than 3 percentage points higher than for white adult men.
Differences in unemployment rates are similarly near historical lows for black women relative to white women, and for Hispanics relative to whites.
Since racial disparities tend to get smaller throughout the course of an economic expansion, it seems likely that racial differences in unemployment rates will continue to shrink if the overall unemployment rate falls further.10
More broadly, the persistent disparities in employment outcomes are mirrored in significant and persistent racial and ethnic differences in families' income and wealth.
As the economic expansion continues and brings more Americans off the sidelines and into productive employment, it seems likely that the positive trends in employment and participation rates for historically disadvantaged groups will continue.
That said, the benefits of a lengthy recovery can only go so far, as the research points to some barriers to labor market outcomes for particular groups that appear to be structural.
After controlling for sectoral and educational differences, the research suggests that these factors include discrimination as well as differences in access to quality education and informal social networks that may be an important source of information and support regarding employment opportunities.13
While the policy tools available to the Federal Reserve are not well suited to addressing the barriers that contribute to persistent disparities in labor market outcomes, understanding these barriers and efforts to address them is vital in assessing maximum employment as well as potential growth.
The Federal Reserve is deeply engaged in understanding disparities through our data collection, research collaboration, and community development work.
One way the Federal Reserve seeks to obtain a clearer picture is by collecting data ourselves.
For instance, some of the data I have cited today come from the Federal Reserve's triennial Survey of Consumer Finances, which provides detailed information on income and wealth holdings by demographic groups.
The Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking provides a portrait of household finances, employment, housing, and debt; the Survey of Young Workers provides insights into younger adults' employment experiences soon after entering the labor force; and the Enterprising and Informal Work Activities Survey provides information about income generating activities that are often outside the scope of other employment and income surveys.14
Each recent edition of the semiannual Monetary Policy Report (MPR) has focused on some aspect of the comparative economic experience of different racial and ethnic groups.
In addition, as indicated in the minutes published after each meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), Federal Reserve staff regularly report on the differential labor experiences of different racial and ethnic groups as background for the FOMC's deliberations on monetary policy.
Across the Federal Reserve System, a variety of initiatives are aimed at understanding economic disparities and how to foster more-inclusive growth.
The Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis brings together researchers from a variety of fields to analyze barriers to economic opportunity and advancement.
The Economic Growth and Mobility Project at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia aims to bring together researchers with community stakeholders to focus on differences in poverty and economic mobility across demographic characteristics.
The Investing in America's Workforce Initiative is a collaboration between the Federal Reserve System and academic research institutions to promote investment in workforce skills that better align with employers' needs.15
In short, a deeper understanding of labor market disparities is central to the mission of the Federal Reserve because it may help us better assess full employment, where resources may be underutilized, and the likely evolution of the labor market and overall economic activity.
Let me conclude by thanking you again for having me here today and allowing me the opportunity to explore some of the factors that influence labor market disparities.
"Income Polarization in the United States (PDF)," IMF Working Paper 16/121.
"Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
Family Finances from 2013 to 2016: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances," Federal Reserve Bulletin.
"Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071.
"The Disparate Labor Market Impacts of Monetary Policy," Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, vol.
"Racial Inequality in the 21st Century: The Declining Significance of Discrimination," in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, vol.
"Income and Poverty in the United States: 2016 (PDF)," Current Population Reports, pp.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
The FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomc_longerrungoals.pdf.
For evidence on the relationship between monetary policy and labor market disparities between some demographic groups, see Carpenter and Rodgers (2004).
See Bernstein (2013) and Alichi, Kantenga, and Solè (2016) for more on the potential link between income and wealth inequality and consumer spending.
See Cajner and others (2017) for more on racial gaps and the labor market.
Data on recent estimates of unemployment rates for adult men (20 years and older) by race and ethnicity are available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
For information about the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, see https://www.minneapolisfed.org/institute, for information about the Economic Growth and Mobility Project, see https://www.philadelphiafed.org/egmp, and for information about the America's Workforce Initiative, see https://www.investinwork.org.


I would like to thank the National Association for Business Economics for inviting me to speak today and for the vital role the association plays in fostering debate on important economic policy questions.
Today I will discuss uncertainty and monetary policy, particularly as it relates to recent inflation developments.
Because changes in interest rates influence economic activity and inflation with a substantial lag, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) sets monetary policy with an eye to its effects on the outlook for the economy.
But the outlook is subject to considerable uncertainty from multiple sources, and dealing with these uncertainties is an important feature of policymaking.
Key among current uncertainties are the forces driving inflation, which has remained low in recent years despite substantial improvement in labor market conditions.
As I will discuss, this low inflation likely reflects factors whose influence should fade over time.
But as I will also discuss, many uncertainties attend this assessment, and downward pressures on inflation could prove to be unexpectedly persistent.
My colleagues and I may have misjudged the strength of the labor market, the degree to which longer-run inflation expectations are consistent with our inflation objective, or even the fundamental forces driving inflation.
In interpreting incoming data, we will need to stay alert to these possibilities and, in light of incoming information, adjust our views about inflation, the overall economy, and the stance of monetary policy best suited to promoting maximum employment and price stability.
Let me begin by reviewing recent inflation developments and the economic outlook.
As the solid blue line in figure 1 indicates, inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) has generally run below the FOMC's 2 percent longer-run objective since that goal was announced in January 2012.1 Core inflation, which strips out volatile food and energy prices, has also fallen persistently short of 2 percent (the red dashed line).
Sustained low inflation such as this is undesirable because, among other things, it generally leads to low settings of the federal funds rate in normal times, thereby providing less scope to ease monetary policy to fight recessions.
In addition, a persistent undershoot of our stated 2 percent goal could undermine the FOMC's credibility, causing inflation expectations to drift and actual inflation and economic activity to become more volatile.
As noted in its recent statement, the FOMC continues to anticipate that, with gradual adjustments in the stance of monetary policy, inflation will rise and stabilize at around 2 percent over the medium term.
This expectation is illustrated by the green stars, which represent the medians of the inflation projections submitted by FOMC participants at our meeting last week.
In part, this expectation reflects the significant improvement in labor market conditions over the past few years.
As shown in figure 2, the unemployment rate (the blue line) now stands at 4.4 percent, somewhat below the median of FOMC participants' estimates of its longer-run sustainable level (the black line).
As the green stars indicate, labor market conditions are expected to strengthen a bit further.
The inflation outlook also reflects the Committee's judgment that inflation expectations will remain reasonably well anchored at a level consistent with PCE price inflation of 2 percent in the long run, and that the restraint imposed in recent years by a variety of special factors, including movements in the relative prices of food, energy, and imports, will wane in coming quarters.
To understand this assessment, it is useful to decompose the forces driving movements in inflation since the financial crisis, as estimated using a simple model of inflation that I presented in a speech two years ago.2 Figure 3 reports this decomposition as the contributions made by various factors to the shortfall of PCE price inflation from 2 percent, year by year.
As illustrated by the purple dotted portion of the bars, labor underutilization, or "slack," accounts for a shrinking share of the shortfall since 2012 and is now having a negligible effect.
By comparison, the influence of changes in relative food, energy, and import prices--the solid blue and checkered red portions--has been more substantial in the past few years, although their contribution is estimated to have greatly diminished this year.3
This year, however, inflation has been unexpectedly weak from the model's perspective.
This unusually large error does not necessarily imply that inflation is more likely to continue to come in on the low side in coming years.4 Some of the recent decline in inflation, although not all, reflects idiosyncratic shifts in the prices of some items, such as the large decline in telecommunication service prices seen earlier in the year, that are unlikely to be repeated.
As the green dashed line in figure 4 illustrates, if the average change in consumer prices each month is calculated excluding items whose price changes are outliers on both the high and low side, the resulting "trimmed mean" measure of inflation shows less of a slowdown this year.5
Based on analyses of this sort, my colleagues and I currently think that this year's low inflation is probably temporary, so we continue to anticipate that inflation is likely to stabilize around 2 percent over the next few years.
But our understanding of the forces driving inflation is imperfect, and we recognize that something more persistent may be responsible for the current undershooting of our longer-run objective.
Although we judge that inflation will most likely stabilize around 2 percent over the next few years, the odds that it could turn out to be noticeably different are considerable.
Here the red line indicates the median of the latest inflation projections submitted by FOMC participants that I showed previously.
The width of this region reflects the average accuracy of inflation projections made by private and government forecasters over the past 20 years.
As the figure shows, based on that history, there is a 30 percent probability that inflation could be greater than 3 percent or less than 1 percent next year.6
Most of this uncertainty reflects the influence of unexpected movements in oil prices and the foreign exchange value of the dollar, as well as that of idiosyncratic developments unrelated to broader economic conditions.
These factors could easily push overall inflation noticeably above or below 2 percent for a time.
But such disturbances are not a great concern from a policy perspective because their effects fade away as long as inflation expectations remain anchored.7 For this reason, the FOMC strives to look through these transitory inflation effects when setting monetary policy.
Such was the case when rising oil prices pushed headline inflation noticeably above 2 percent for several years prior to the financial crisis.
Similarly, the Committee substantially discounted the reductions in inflation that occurred from 2014 through 2016 as a result of the decline in oil prices and the effects of the dollar's appreciation on import prices.
A more important issue from a policy standpoint is that some key assumptions underlying the baseline outlook could be wrong in ways that imply that inflation will remain low for longer than currently projected.
For example, labor market conditions may not be as tight as they appear to be, and thus they may exert less upward pressure on inflation than anticipated.
Alternatively, long-run inflation expectations, which have an important influence on actual inflation, may not be consistent with the FOMC's 2 percent goal.
More broadly, the conventional framework for understanding inflation dynamics could be misspecified in some fundamental way.
The unemployment rate consistent with long-run price stability at any time is not known with certainty; we can only estimate it.
The median of the longer-run unemployment rate projections submitted by FOMC participants last week is around 4‑1/2 percent.
But the long-run sustainable unemployment rate can drift over time because of demographic changes and other factors, some of which can be difficult to quantify--or even identify--in real time.8 For these and other reasons, the statistical precision of such estimates is limited, and the actual value of the sustainable rate could well be noticeably lower than currently projected.9 Thus, although FOMC participants generally view current labor utilization as probably somewhat greater than what can be sustained in the longer run, the statistical evidence from past experience does not rule out the possibility that some slack still remains in the labor market.
If so, the economy could sustain a higher level of employment and output in the longer run than now anticipated--a very beneficial outcome, albeit one that would require recalibrating monetary policy over time in order to reap those benefits and compensate for the accompanying reduction in inflationary pressures.
A related question is whether the unemployment rate alone is an adequate gauge of economic slack for the purposes of explaining inflation.
Although the unemployment rate is probably the best single summary measure of labor utilization, some indicators have shown less improvement since the financial crisis.10 As the solid blue line in figure 6 illustrates, the employed share of the "prime-age worker" population--that is, persons from ages 25 to 54--remains noticeably below the 2007 level.11 But employment rates for this group may now be permanently lower than in the past as a result of declining employment opportunities for less-skilled workers, a rising number of people receiving disability insurance, and other worrisome trends.12 Similarly, although the share of part-time workers who would like a full-time job is still somewhat above where it stood before the last two recessions (the dashed red line), it could reflect a structural change in firms' reliance on part-time labor.13 In addition, these two measures have to be weighed against other labor indicators that have either returned to, or are currently above, their pre-recession levels.
As shown in figure 7, those indicators include the quits rate (the short-dashed blue line), household perceptions of job availability (the short-and-long-dashed green line), the jobs opening rate (the long-dashed red line), and the percentage of small firms finding it hard to fill jobs (the solid black line).
On balance, the unemployment rate probably is correct in signaling that overall labor market conditions have returned to pre-crisis levels.
But that return does not necessarily demonstrate that the economy is now at maximum employment because, due to demographic and other structural changes, the unemployment rate that is sustainable today may be lower than the rate that was sustainable in the past.
In that regard, some observers have pointed to the continued subdued pace of wage growth as evidence that the economy is not yet back to full employment.
As shown in figure 8, labor compensation as measured by the employment cost index (the short-dashed red line) has been growing at more or less the same rate since 2014, and hourly compensation in the nonfarm business sector (the short-and-long-dashed green line)--a quite noisy measure, even after smoothing--is actually growing more slowly.
But growth in average hourly earnings (the solid blue line) and the Atlanta Fed's Wage Growth Tracker (the long-dashed black line) have clearly picked up.14 In addition, productivity growth has been quite weak in recent years, and empirical analysis suggests that it is has been holding down aggregate growth in labor compensation independent of labor utilization in recent years.15 An analysis of the pattern of wage growth at the U.S.
state level also suggests that subdued growth for the country as a whole probably reflects sluggish productivity or some other factor common to all states, because cross-state differences in wage growth are about what one would expect given cross-state differences in unemployment rates.16 Finally, I would note that the percentage of firms planning wage increases has moved back up to its pre-recession level, many firms report difficulties in finding qualified workers, and some have responded by expanding training programs and offering signing bonuses--possible harbingers of stronger wage gains to come.
Overall, I view the data we have in hand as suggesting a generally healthy labor market, not one in which substantial slack remains or one that is overheated.
That said, the evidence does not allow for any definitive assessment, so policymakers must remain open minded on this question and its implications for reaching our inflation goal.
In standard economic models, inflation expectations are an important determinant of actual inflation because, in deciding how much to adjust wages for individual jobs and prices of goods and services at a particular time, firms take into account the rate of overall inflation they expect to prevail in the future.
Monetary policy presumably plays a key role in shaping these expectations by influencing the average rate of inflation experienced in the past over long periods of time, as well as by providing guidance about the FOMC's objectives for inflation in the future.
Even so, economists' understanding of exactly how and why inflation expectations change over time is limited.17 Moreover, we have to contend with the fact that we do not directly observe the inflation expectations relevant to wage and price setting.
The FOMC's outlook depends importantly on the view that longer-run inflation expectations have been stable for many years at a level consistent with PCE price inflation that will average around 2 percent in the longer run.
Provided this stability continues, standard models suggest that actual inflation should stabilize at about 2 percent over the next two or three years in an environment of roughly full employment, absent any future shocks.
However, there is a risk that inflation expectations may not be as well anchored as they appear and perhaps are not consistent with our 2 percent goal.
Long-range projections of PCE price inflation made by private forecasters, the solid red line, have been remarkably stable for many years, as have been the longer-run inflation expectations reported in surveys of financial market participants (not shown).18 Households' longer-term expectations as reported in the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers, the short-dashed blue line, have also been fairly stable overall since the late 1990s.19 That said, results from this survey, as well as a survey of consumers carried out by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, do hint that expectations may have slipped a bit over the past two or three years.
If so, stabilizing inflation at around 2 percent could prove to be more difficult than expected.20
In theory, differences between yields on conventional Treasury securities and those on Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities (TIPS) are also informative about inflation expectations in that they measure the compensation received by investors for exposing themselves to future changes in consumer prices.
As indicated by the long-dashed green line, TIPS inflation compensation for the five-year period starting five years from now has fallen roughly 1 percentage point over the past three years.
This decline could be interpreted as a significant drop in market participants' expectations for the most likely outcome for inflation in the longer run.
However, research suggests that the fall in TIPS inflation compensation instead primarily reflects a decline in inflation risk premiums and differences in the liquidity of nominal and indexed Treasury securities.21 This research notwithstanding, the notable decline in inflation compensation may be a sign that longer-term inflation expectations have slipped recently.
Another risk is that our framework for understanding inflation dynamics could be misspecified in some fundamental way, perhaps because our econometric models overlook some factor that will restrain inflation in coming years despite solid labor market conditions.
One possibility in this vein is a continuation of the subdued growth in health-care prices that we have seen in recent years--a sector-specific factor not controlled for in standard models.
Because health care accounts for a large share of total consumer spending, this slow growth has restrained overall inflation materially and may continue to do so for some time.22 A similar situation occurred during the 1990s, when a significant shift in health insurance enrollment away from fee-for-service and toward HMO (that is, Health Maintenance Organization) plans reduced cost pressures and held down overall inflation for several years.
If these sorts of favorable supply-type shocks continue, achieving our 2 percent inflation goal over the medium term may require a more accommodative stance of monetary policy than might otherwise be appropriate.
Some commentators have conjectured that, because of rising trade volumes and the integration of production chains across countries, U.S.
inflation now depends on global resource utilization, not just on conditions here at home and those effects arising through movements in energy and import prices.
However, studies of this issue do not, on balance, provide much empirical support for this possibility.23 Moreover, foreign economic growth has firmed this year and the global economy appears to have largely recovered, so any influence that global resource utilization might have on U.S.
Nevertheless, increased competition from the integration of China and other emerging market countries into the world economy may have materially restrained price margins and labor compensation in the United States and other advanced economies.
In fact, one study concludes that most of the decline in the labor share of national income in the United States since the late 1980s can be attributed to offshoring of labor-intensive production.24 If this restraint on the labor share continues to build over the next few years (and not merely holds steady), then it could indirectly hold down the growth of domestic wages and prices in ways not captured by conventional models.
More speculatively, changes in the structure of the domestic economy may also be altering inflation dynamics in ways not captured by conventional models.
The growing importance of online shopping, by increasing the competitiveness of the U.S.
retail sector, may have reduced price margins and restrained the ability of firms to raise prices in response to rising demand.25 That said, the economy overall appears to have become more concentrated and less dynamic in recent years, which may tend to increase firms' pricing power.26 Because these changes occur slowly, determining their complex effects on the economy will, as a practical matter, require studying data over a considerable time.
Finally, I would note the possibility that inflation may rise more sharply in response to robust labor market conditions than anticipated.
The influence of labor utilization on inflation has become quite modest over the past 20 years, implying that the inflationary consequences of misjudging the sustainable rate of unemployment are low.
But we cannot be sure that this modest sensitivity will persist in the face of strong labor market conditions, given that we do not fully understand how it came to be so modest in the first place.
Although the evidence is weak that inflation responds in a nonlinear manner to resource utilization, this risk is one that we cannot entirely dismiss.
What are the policy implications of these uncertainties? For one, my colleagues and I must be ready to adjust our assessments of economic conditions and the outlook when new data warrant it.
In this spirit, FOMC participants--like private forecasters--have reduced their estimates of the sustainable unemployment rate appreciably over the past few years in response to the continual flow of information about the always changing economy.27 To the extent these assessments change over time, so too will the outlook and judgments about the appropriate stance of monetary policy.
Importantly, even if resource utilization is currently lower than we estimate or if longer-run inflation expectations are running at levels consistent with longer-run PCE price inflation somewhat below 2 percent, the FOMC can still achieve its inflation goal.
Under those conditions, continuing to revise our assessments in response to incoming data would naturally result in a policy path that is somewhat easier than that now anticipated--an appropriate course correction that would reflect our commitment to maximum employment and price stability.
Similar considerations apply to other important sources of uncertainty, such as the value of the neutral real interest rate--that is, the inflation-adjusted level of the federal funds rate consistent with keeping the economy operating on an even keel.
Estimates of this rate have declined considerably in recent years, and, by some estimates, the real neutral rate is currently close to zero.
But the neutral rate changes over time as a result of the interaction of many forces, including demographics, productivity growth, fiscal policy, and the strength of global demand, so its value at any point in time cannot be estimated or projected with much precision.
My FOMC colleagues and I will therefore need to continue to reassess and revise our assessments of the neutral rate in response to incoming data and adjust monetary policy accordingly.
How should policy be formulated in the face of such significant uncertainties? In my view, it strengthens the case for a gradual pace of adjustments.
Moving too quickly risks overadjusting policy to head off projected developments that may not come to pass.
A gradual approach is particularly appropriate in light of subdued inflation and a low neutral real interest rate, which imply that the FOMC will have only limited scope to cut the federal funds rate should the economy be hit with an adverse shock.28 But we should also be wary of moving too gradually.
Job gains continue to run well ahead of the longer-run pace we estimate would be sufficient, on average, to provide jobs for new entrants to the labor force.
Thus, without further modest increases in the federal funds rate over time, there is a risk that the labor market could eventually become overheated, potentially creating an inflationary problem down the road that might be difficult to overcome without triggering a recession.
Persistently easy monetary policy might also eventually lead to increased leverage and other developments, with adverse implications for financial stability.
For these reasons, and given that monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation with a substantial lag, it would be imprudent to keep monetary policy on hold until inflation is back to 2 percent.
To conclude, standard empirical analyses support the FOMC's outlook that, with gradual adjustments in monetary policy, inflation will stabilize at around the FOMC's 2 percent objective over the next few years, accompanied by some further strengthening in labor market conditions.
But the outlook is uncertain, reflecting, among other things, the inherent imprecision in our estimates of labor utilization, inflation expectations, and other factors.
As a result, we will need to carefully monitor the incoming data and, as warranted, adjust our assessments of the outlook and the appropriate stance of monetary policy.
But in making these adjustments, our longer-run objectives will remain unchanged--to promote maximum employment and 2 percent inflation.
Appendix: PCE Inflation Model, Inflation Decomposition Procedure, and the ECI Growth Equation
The inflation model used in the decomposition procedure includes two equations: an identity for the change in the price index for total personal consumption expenditures (PCE) and a simple reduced-form forecasting equation for core PCE price inflation.
where $$ \pi_t$$ and $$ \pi_t^c$$ denote growth rates (expressed as annualized log differences) of total and core PCE prices, respectively.
$$ {RPIE}_t$$ and $$ {RPIF}_t$$ are annualized growth rates for prices of consumer energy goods and services and prices of food and beverages, both expressed relative to core PCE prices, and $$ \omega_t^e$$ and $$ \omega_t^f$$ are the weights of energy and food in total consumption.
where $$ \pi_t^e$$ is expected long-run inflation; $$ {SLACK}_t$$ denotes the level of resource utilization, $$ {RPIM}_t$$ controls for the effect of changes in the relative price of core imported goods, $$ \epsilon_t$$ is a white-noise error term, and the coefficients are ordinary least squares estimates obtained using data from 1990:Q1 to 2014:Q4.
For estimation purposes, $$ {SLACK}_t$$ is approximated using the unemployment rate less the Congressional Budget Office's (CBO) historical series for the long-run natural rate.
From 2007 to the present, $$ \pi_t^e$$ is approximated using the median forecasts of long-run PCE price inflation reported in the Survey of Professional Forecasters; from 1991:Q4 to 2006:Q4, the series is based on the median long-run forecasts of inflation as measured by the consumer price index (CPI), less a constant adjustment of 40 basis points to put the CPI forecasts on a PCE basis; before 1991:Q4, $$ \pi_t^e$$ is approximated by the long-run inflation expectations reported in the Hoey survey.
The relative import price term, $$ {RPIM}_t$$, is defined as the annualized growth rate of the price index for core imported goods (defined to exclude petroleum, natural gas, computers, and semiconductors) less the lagged four-quarter change in core PCE inflation, all multiplied by the share of nominal core imported goods in nominal GDP.30
To decompose recent movements in inflation into its various components, the series used in the inflation model--for which complete quarterly data are available only through 2017:Q2 in most cases--are first extended through the end of 2017.
In the case of inflation, the extensions are consistent with the medians of Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants' projections for total and core PCE inflation in 2017 that were reported at the press conference following the September 2017 FOMC meeting.31 Similarly, $$ {SLACK}_t$$ over the second half of 2017 is defined to be consistent with the median of FOMC projections for the 2017:Q4 unemployment rate less the CBO's estimates of the historical path of the long-run natural rate.
The CBO's 2017 estimate is slightly higher than the median of FOMC participants' most recent projections of the normal longer-run level of the unemployment rate.
For changes in the price of core imports, the 2017:H2 extrapolations are based on a regression of this series on current and lagged changes in exchange rates.
This approach predicts that core import prices should rise about 4-1/2 percent at an annual rate in the second half of this year.32 Energy and food prices over the second half of 2017 are assumed to rise at annual rates of 10 percent and 1.6 percent, respectively; these assumptions (which take into account published monthly PCE data through July and published CPI data through August, as well as recent movements in gasoline prices in the wake of Hurricanes Harvey and Irma) ensure that the combined contribution of food and energy prices to inflation in 2017 is consistent with the median difference between FOMC participants' projections for total and core inflation.
Finally, nominal spending shares for food, energy, and core imports are assumed to remain unchanged at their 2017:Q2 levels, and long-run inflation expectations are assumed to remain constant at 2 percent.
One by one, each explanatory variable of the model is set to zero, and the model is simulated; the resulting difference between actual inflation and its simulated value equals the historical contribution of that particular factor.
Importantly, the simulations are all dynamic in that the lagged inflation term in the core inflation equation is set equal to its simulated value in the preceding period rather than its actual value.
As a result, the decompositions incorporate the effects of changes in lagged inflation that are attributable to previous movements in the explanatory variables.
The estimated equation for the employment cost index (ECI) is:
where $$ \pi_t^w$$ is the annualized log difference of the ECI for hourly compensation of private industry workers, $$ \pi_t^e$$ and $$ {SLACK}_t$$ have the same definition as the corresponding variables from the PCE price inflation model, $$ \Delta{SLACK}_t$$ denotes the first difference of $$ {SLACK}_t$$, $$ {MA\_PROD}_t$$ is a moving average of an estimate of trend productivity growth for the business sector, and $$ \varepsilon_t$$ is an error term.33 The coefficients are obtained from a restricted least squares regression using quarterly data from 1988:Q1 to 2017:Q2.34 Trend productivity growth is estimated as the low-frequency component of the annualized log difference of business-sector output per hour from the Bureau of Labor Statistics Productivity and Costs report.35 The moving average of trend productivity growth (which is used in the estimation) is computed as a geometrically declining weighted average,
where $$ {PROD}_t$$ denotes trend productivity growth and where the moving average is initialized in 1955:Q1 with that quarter's estimate of the trend growth rate.
The model is used to compute a decomposition of ECI growth following a procedure similar to that used to construct the decomposition for core PCE price inflation.
Note: ECI growth is reported as average percent changes at an annual rate for the periods shown; contributions are expressed in percentage points.
Contributions may not sum to total growth because of rounding.
"Changing Labor Force Composition and the Natural Rate of Unemployment," Chicago Fed Letter 338.
"Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp.
"Skills, Tasks and Technologies: Implications for Employment and Earnings," in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, vol.
"TIPS Liquidity and the Outlook for Inflation," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-35.
San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November 21.
"The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States," American Economic Review, vol.
"The Natural Rate of Unemployment over the Past 100 Years," FRBSF Economic Letter 2017-23.
San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, August 14.
San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, March 20.
"Globalization and Inflation: New Cross-Country Evidence on the Global Determinants of Domestic Inflation (PDF)," BIS Working Paper 227.
"Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"Medicare Payment Cuts Continue to Restrain Inflation," FRBSF Economic Letter 2016-15.
San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, May 9.
"Benefits of Competition and Indicators of Market Power (PDF)," Council of Economic Advisers Issue Brief.
"Expect a Return to Inflation--But Not as We Once Knew It," Bloomberg, May 16, www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2017-05-16/amazon-effect-means-global-inflation-just-ain-t-what-it-once-was.
"Composition and Aggregate Real Wage Growth," American Economic Review, vol.
San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, March 7.
Washington: Hutchins Center on Fiscal and Monetary Policy, Brookings Institution, September.
"The Growing Importance of Social Skills in the Labor Market," Quarterly Journal of Economics.
Labor Share (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp.
"The Effect of Disability Insurance Receipt on Labor Supply," American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, vol.
Declining Business Dynamism in the United States: A Look at States and Metros.
"Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and Inflation Hypotheses," International Finance, vol.
"U.S.: Tight State Labor Markets Show Effects on Wage Growth," Economic Research Note.
"Can Demography Affect Inflation and Monetary Policy?" BIS Working Paper 485.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October 14.
"The Surprisingly Swift Decline of US Manufacturing Employment," American Economic Review, vol.
"Gauging the Uncertainty of the Economic Outlook Using Historical Forecasting Errors: The Federal Reserve's Approach (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-020.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February.
"Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy," IMF Economic Review, vol.
"Involuntary Part-Time Work: Here to Stay?" FRBSF Economic Letter 2015-19.
San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, June 8.
"Labor Market Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at "Re-evaluating Labor Market Dynamics," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 21-23.
"Inflation Dynamics and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Philip Gamble Memorial Lecture, University of Massachusetts, Amherst, Amherst, Mass., September 24.
"Macroeconomic Research after the Crisis," speech delivered at "The Elusive 'Great' Recovery: Causes and Implications for Future Business Cycle Dynamics," 60th annual economic conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Mass., October 14.
"Impact of Demographic Changes on Inflation and the Macroeconomy (PDF)," IMF Working Paper WP/14/210.
The Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website at www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/FOMC_LongerRunGoals.pdf.
The simple model links the current rate of inflation to several factors, including lagged inflation, long-run inflation expectations, labor utilization, and changes in the relative prices of food, energy and imports (Yellen, 2015).
In the decomposition procedure, movements in core inflation affect headline inflation one-for-one; as a result, the contributions of food and energy price inflation are defined as each component's price change relative to the core, weighted by its share in total nominal consumer spending.
The estimated contribution of movements in import prices is also computed relative to core inflation; thus, if import prices are rising at the same rate as core inflation, they have no estimated effect on the shortfall of overall inflation from 2 percent.
In addition, the decomposition takes account of lags in the adjustment of core inflation to movements in resource utilization and other factors.
In the simple model, inflation depends in part on lagged inflation.
As a result, an unexplained movement in inflation is predicted to influence inflation beyond the current quarter, but to a degree that fades over time.
In general, price changes measured over a few months tend to be noisy, even when measured on a core or trimmed-mean basis.
For this reason, the FOMC usually focuses on the growth rate of PCE prices over the previous 12 months, which smooths through the volatility in the monthly price data.
This approach also sidesteps distortions in the monthly data associated with residual seasonality; these distortions are likely to hold down month-to-month changes in prices over the balance of the year (see Peneva, 2014).
That said, 12‑month rates of inflation will continue to be held down through early 2018 by the unusually weak monthly readings on price changes recorded in early 2017.
This statement abstracts from any persistent effects such disturbances might have on real activity, which could have implications for monetary policy.
For example, Aaronson and others (2015) estimate that increases in the average age and educational attainment of U.S.
workers will reduce the sustainable rate of unemployment almost 1/2 percentage point between 2014 and 2020.
Barnichon and Mesters (2017) also present evidence that demographic changes have somewhat reduced the structural unemployment rate in the United States in recent years.
Relatedly, Yoon, Kim, and Lee (2014) and Juselius and Takats (2015) estimate that ongoing demographic transitions are having modest disinflationary effects in the United States and other developed economies.
The statistical evidence also suggests that the sustainable rate of unemployment could be higher.
As illustrated by the results reported in Reifschneider, Wascher, and Wilcox (2015) and Barnichon and Matthes (2017), standard errors for estimates of the sustainable rate of unemployment are typically at least 1/2 percentage point.
Accordingly, if the sustainable rate is estimated to be about 4-1/2 percent, there is roughly a 15 percent probability that the actual value is less than 4 percent; symmetrically, there is a 15 percent probability that it is greater than 5 percent.
Several years ago, I discussed the interpretation of a wide range of labor market indicators at length (Yellen, 2014).
The labor force participation rate for prime-age men has been declining for decades.
For a general discussion of the decline in male labor force participation, see Aaronson and others (2014).
For a discussion of the role played by technical factors in this decline, see Deming (forthcoming) and Acemoglu and Autor (2011); for a discussion of the role of globalization, see Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2013) and Pierce and Schott (2016).
Relatedly, an alarming deterioration in health outcomes among low-education workers, including a rise in deaths related to alcohol, drugs, and suicide, may be having an adverse effect on both male and female employment (Case and Deaton, 2017).
In contrast to the other wage and compensation measures, the Wage Growth Tracker only measures wage changes for individuals who had a job in both the current month and a year ago.
For example, predictions from a simple empirical model track recent movements in the employment cost index reasonably well, because the model estimates that the increasing upward pressure on compensation growth from rising labor utilization is being offset by a declining contribution from productivity growth.
(See the appendix for further details.) Relatedly, research also suggests that cyclical changes in the composition of the workforce associated with the absorption of new workers with relatively low skills and experience may be currently restraining growth in both aggregate wages and productivity.
In the Survey of Primary Dealers conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the median of respondents' longer-term projections for PCE inflation have been essentially flat at 2 percent since the survey began in 2011.
Similarly, in the Blue Chip Financial Indicators survey, which solicits the views of a large number of financial firms (as well as a few other institutions) about the extended outlook every June and December, the median of long-run expectations for GDP price inflation has stayed close to 2.1 percent over the past six years.
For example, some surveys include the low rates of inflation expected over the next few years in the calculation of projected longer-run averages, while other surveys exclude them.
Expected inflation over the next 5 to 10 years as reported in the Michigan survey runs appreciably above PCE price inflation on average since the mid-1990s, perhaps because households are less informed about actual inflation developments than professional forecasters and financial firms.
For this reason, it may be best to focus on changes over time in the Michigan measure, not on the level.
In addition to monitoring survey measures of expected inflation, Federal Reserve staff also use statistical techniques to try to directly estimate possible movements over time in the underlying long-run trend in inflation, using data for actual inflation and other series, including resource utilization.
Many of these statistical estimates suggest that the underlying trend in PCE inflation is currently somewhat below 2 percent.
Econometrically, however, it is extremely difficult if not impossible to disentangle estimates of the underlying trend in PCE inflation from estimates of the sustainable rate of unemployment.
To be consistent with the data, the higher one's estimate of trend inflation or expected long-run inflation, the lower must be one's estimate of the sustainable unemployment rate, at least over the medium run.
For example, Andreasen and Christensen (2016) show that once TIPS liquidity premiums are taken into account, the model-implied one-year inflation expectation becomes more stable and shows a smaller decline since 2013.
In addition, quotes on inflation derivatives suggest that most of the decline in inflation compensation over this period is associated with investor perceptions of reduced risks of above-target inflation outcomes rather than increased risks of below-target inflation outcomes.
Personal consumption expenditures include all medical services, including those paid by Medicare and Medicaid; prices for the latter may be viewed as "administered" because they are essentially set by the government.
Aside from these direct influences of government policy on healthcare prices, some research suggests that lower Medicare prices tend to lead to lower negotiated prices by private insurers as well (see Clemens, Gottlieb, and Shapiro, 2016).
In an early study, Borio and Filardo (2007) reported results suggesting that global economic slack adds considerable explanatory power to reduced-form inflation equations (such as the one discussed in the appendix), and that its role has been growing over time.
However, Ihrig, Kamin, Lindner, and Marquez (2010) subsequently argued that the estimated link was not robust to alternative measures of global resource utilization.
Federal Reserve Board staff have updated this analysis using data through early 2017 and confirmed that global slack does not appear to exert an appreciable direct effect on domestic inflation in the United States and most other advanced economies.
Using sector-level data, Elsby, Hobijn, and Sahin (2013) estimate the contributions of offshoring, the substitution of capital for low-skilled labor, and several other factors on the aggregate U.S.
labor share of income, and find that only offshoring has been important.
They also conclude that the decline in the labor share since the late 1980s has been overstated as a result of statistical measurement problems.
In contrast to the influence of globalization on the U.S.
labor share, Feenstra and Weinstein (2017) find that the influence of increased globalization on price markups in the United States has been modest.
For more on the inflation implications of innovation in the retail sector, see Curran and Jamrisko (2017) and Trainer (2016).
For a review of changes over time in the competitive structure of the overall economy, see Council of Economic Advisers (2016).
For a discussion of the evidence for, and some of the implications of, changes in the dynamism of the economy, see Hathaway and Litan (2014) and Decker and others (2016).
The median of FOMC participants' projections of the longer-run unemployment rate has declined almost a full percentage point over the past five years; the revision in the long-run consensus forecast reported in the Blue Chip Survey between October 2012 and March 2017 was slightly larger.
It might be thought that the FOMC could mitigate this problem by raising the federal funds rate higher than might otherwise be called for while the economy continues to expand in order to increase the extent to which interest rates could be cut later should a recession occur.
But this strategy would be counterproductive, because it would only serve to weaken economic activity and push down inflation before the recession.
This measure of core import prices is constructed by Board staff using published and unpublished data provided by the Bureau of Economic Analysis and the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
The level of core import prices, expressed relative to core consumer prices, displayed a modest downward trend from 1990 through 2001 but since then has displayed little persistent trend, particularly if one controls for shifts related to recent changes in the real exchange rate.
If the post-2001 pattern persists in coming years, then $$ {RPIM}_t$$ would be expected to converge to zero within a few quarters and core PCE inflation to converge to 2 percent within two or three years, assuming that the unemployment rate remains near 4-1/2 percent (the median of the longer-run projections provided by FOMC participants) and there are no further shocks to the exchange rate and other factors.
If, however, core import prices were expected to resume trending down relative to consumer prices, then the model as specified would imply that the unemployment rate consistent with inflation stabilizing at 2 percent in the longer run would be somewhat lower than 4-1/2 percent.
(All data used in the model were current as of September 1, 2017.) Return to text
The estimation procedure imposes the joint restriction that the sum of the coefficients on $$ \pi_{t-1}^e$$ and the lagged ECI growth terms are equal to 1, and that the coefficients on $$ \pi_{t-1}^e$$ and $$ {MA\_PROD}_t$$ are equal.
The filter width and cutoffs are set equal to the values used in Douglas Staiger, James Stock, and Mark Watson (2001), "Prices, Wages, and the U.S.
NAIRU in the 1990s," in Alan Krueger and Robert Solow, eds., The Roaring Nineties: Can Full Employment Be Sustained? (New York: Russell Sage Foundation and Century Foundation Press), pp.
Before the series' starting point in 1947:Q2, actual productivity growth is padded with an ARIMA(4,1,0) model; after its 2017:Q2 endpoint, the series is padded with the CBO's January 2017 forecast of average nonfarm business trend productivity growth from 2017 to 2027 (which is 1.67 percent in log differences) and with the 2027 value of the CBO forecast (1.77 percent) thereafter.


At "Disparities in the Labor Market: What Are We Missing?" a research conference sponsored by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C.
Understanding why some groups persistently fare better than others in the job market and how these disparities may affect the economy's overall performance is vitally important to the Federal Reserve.
While opportunity and inclusion have long been central to American values, it is increasingly clear that they are also central to the strength of our economy.1
As directed by the Congress, the Federal Reserve's dual mandate is to promote maximum employment and stable prices.
In fulfilling its dual mandate, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has set a target of 2 percent for inflation but does not have a similarly fixed numerical goal for maximum employment.
That is because the level of maximum employment depends on "nonmonetary factors that affect the structure and dynamics of the labor market," which "may change over time and may not be directly measurable."2 Understanding how close the labor market is to our full-employment goal requires consulting a variety of evidence along with a healthy dose of judgment.
The recognition that maximum employment evolves over time to reflect changes in the economic landscape serves us well by requiring FOMC participants to develop a nuanced understanding of labor market developments.
This approach to maximum employment has allowed the FOMC to navigate the current expansion in a way that has likely brought more people back into productive employment than might have been the case with a fixed unemployment rate target based on pre-crisis standards.
This is especially true at a time when the traditional Phillips curve relationship is flatter than in the past, which means that price inflation is likely to be less informative regarding labor market tightness than it was previously.3 It therefore seems particularly valuable to look beyond inflation and headline unemployment to assess the strength of the labor market.
Even when aggregate economic statistics look strong, studying geographic areas and demographic groups that are not faring as well can point to ways of further improving the economy's performance.
The Federal Reserve is also keenly interested in disparities in employment, labor force participation, income, and wealth because they may have implications for the growth capacity of the economy.
When we consider appropriate monetary policy, we need to have a good sense of how fast the economy can grow without fueling excessive price inflation.
At a time when the retirement of the baby-boom generation looks likely to be something of a drag on the growth of the labor force, it is especially important to consider whether relatively low levels of employment and labor force participation for some prime working-age groups represent slack that, if successfully tapped, could increase the labor force and boost economic activity.
More broadly, when a person who was previously unemployed or discouraged secures a job, not only does it boost the economy, but that person also may gain a greater sense of economic security, self-sufficiency, and self-worth and be better able to invest in their family's future.
With a richer understanding of economic or social barriers that inhibit labor market success and prosperity for some groups, we may better grasp how much these individuals can be helped by broad economic expansion and how much targeted intervention is required through other policy means.
There is also an important connection between the economy's potential growth rate and equality of opportunity.
To the extent that disparities in income and wealth across race, ethnicity, gender, or geography reflect such disparities in opportunity, families and small businesses from the disadvantaged groups will then underinvest in education or business endeavors, and potential growth will fall short of the levels it might otherwise attain.4
Aside from reducing the long-run productive potential of the economy, persistently high levels of income and wealth inequality may also have implications for the robustness of consumer spending, which accounts for roughly two-thirds of aggregate spending in the United States.
For example, results from the Federal Reserve's latest Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF), which is due to be released soon, indicate that the share of income held by the top 1 percent of households reached 24 percent in 2015, up from 17 percent in 1988.
When we disaggregate the economy-wide labor market statistics, we find significant and persistent racial and ethnic disparities.7 In August, the national unemployment rate of 4.4 percent, which is low by historical standards, masked substantial differences across different demographic groups.
As shown in figure 1, unemployment rates ranged from 3.9 percent for whites to 4 percent for Asians, 5.2 percent for Hispanics, and 7.7 percent for African Americans.
Labor force participation rates, shown in figure 2, also differ substantially, although by less than unemployment rates, with the rate for African Americans lowest at 62.2 percent.
Even more striking, a significant portion of the gaps in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups cannot be attributed to differences in their underlying characteristics, such as age and education levels.8
Although the differences in employment rates between racial and ethnic groups are still quite large, they have narrowed recently, after having widened considerably during the recession, and are near their lowest levels in decades.
Differences in unemployment rates across racial and ethnic groups tend to widen sharply during recessions, as less advantaged groups shoulder an outsized share of total layoffs, and these differences shrink during recoveries.
For example, in the second quarter of 2017, the unemployment rate for black adult men was a little more than 3 percentage points higher than for white adult men.
Differences in unemployment rates are similarly near historical lows for black women relative to white women, and for Hispanics relative to whites.
Since racial disparities tend to get smaller throughout the course of an economic expansion, it seems likely that racial differences in unemployment rates will continue to shrink if the overall unemployment rate falls further.9
More broadly, the persistent disparities in employment outcomes are mirrored in significant and persistent racial and ethnic differences in families' income and wealth.
As the economic expansion continues and brings more Americans off the sidelines and into productive employment, it seems likely that the positive trends in employment and participation rates for historically disadvantaged groups will continue.
That said, the benefits of a lengthy recovery can only go so far, as the research points to some barriers to labor market outcomes for particular groups that appear to be structural.
After controlling for sectoral and educational differences, the research suggests that these factors include discrimination as well as differences in access to quality education and informal social networks that may be an important source of information and support regarding employment opportunities.12 While the policy tools available to the Federal Reserve are not well suited to addressing the barriers that contribute to persistent disparities in labor market outcomes, understanding these barriers and efforts to address them is vital in assessing maximum employment as well as potential growth.
The Federal Reserve System benefits not only from our engagement with research, statistics, and surveys, but also from our presence in communities all across America.
This local presence, by design, provides valuable perspectives on how Americans in different communities are experiencing the economy and the varied challenges that lie beneath the aggregate numbers.
While traveling around the country with our community development staff, I have been struck by the widening gulf between the economic fortunes of our large metropolitan areas and those of our small cities, towns, and rural areas.
Since some workers and families may find it difficult to move, this concentration of economic opportunities in larger cities may have adverse implications for the well-being of these households and, potentially, the growth capacity of the economy as a whole.
Although pockets of opportunity and poverty are found in large metropolitan and rural areas alike, a greater share of the new jobs and business establishments created during the recovery that followed the Great Recession have been in larger metro areas than was the case in previous recoveries.14 In countless rural towns and small cities we are seeing how a deep economic setback can leave a profound and long-lasting mark.
Technological change, globalization, and other shifts in demand and costs are not new to the U.S.
And the evidence suggests that concentrated economic shocks and the associated labor market stress also have broader consequences for health and mortality.15
To provide some sense of the magnitudes, on average over the past year the unemployment rate for adults of prime working age (25 to 54) was about 1 percentage point higher in nonmetropolitan areas than in larger metro areas.16 But there is an even greater gap in labor force engagement, as can be seen in figure 5.
The participation rate for prime-age adults in larger metro areas is currently nearly 3‑1/2 percentage points above the participation rate for prime-age adults in nonmetro areas.
Interestingly, the geographic participation rate gap between more and less populous areas is apparent for all races as well as, in recent years, for both men and women.17
This gap in labor force participation between large cities and other areas has widened substantially since just before the Great Recession: Since 2007, the participation rate for prime-age adults in nonmetro areas has fallen nearly 3 percentage points, as compared with less than 1 percentage point on net in larger metro areas.
Indeed, since 2007, the large decline in labor force participation in small metro and rural areas can explain about 40 percent of the economy-wide decline in prime-age labor force participation, even though these areas account for a smaller 25 percent of the population.
Before discussing possible contributors to this growing participation gap, it is important to emphasize that less populous areas appear to be falling behind in ways beyond these employment outcomes.
In the small towns and hollers of eastern Kentucky, I visited with community development financial institutions that are trying to plug the gap in access to credit so that small businesses can continue operating and hiring locally, and so that families can access housing that is safe and affordable.
In Texas, I learned about barriers to economic development in the rural colonias areas on the southern border associated with underinvestment in physical and broadband infrastructure.21
economy, it is important to better understand the decade-long decline in aggregate labor force participation.
It is striking that in larger metro areas, the labor force participation rate for prime-age men has recently retraced much of the decline experienced during the recession, while in smaller metro and rural areas, the labor force participation rate remains well below its pre-recession level, with only modest improvements of late.
The evidence increasingly suggests that much of the decline relates to a sustained decline in job opportunities for prime-age men, especially less-educated prime-age men, resulting in languishing wages relative to other groups.22 Indeed, it is notable that the striking decrease in labor force participation rates for nonmetro areas relative to large metro areas is highly concentrated among adults with no more than a high school education, who comprise a larger share of the prime-age population in nonmetro areas.
The labor force participation rate for adults with no more than a high school education has fallen to 72 percent in nonmetro areas--about 3-1/2 percent below larger metro areas.23
For example, a growing body of research has identified a steeper decline in the employment and labor force attachment of prime-age men in areas of the country that specialized in the industries that were most negatively affected by increased imports from China.25
Research suggests that some of the decline in prime-age labor force participation relates to some individuals' reduced ability or desire to work, in some cases resulting directly from the ongoing decline in job opportunities.
One possibility is that the unusually long spells of nonemployment associated with the Great Recession may have eroded job skills and informal employment networks.
Another possibility that is increasingly in focus is that physical disabilities, as well as sharp increases in opioid use, have increasingly inhibited some individuals from participating in the labor force.
The fraction of prime-age men receiving disability insurance benefits has increased from 1 percent in the late 1970s to 3 percent more recently.26 Recent research also finds that among all prime-age men who are not in the labor force, about one-third reported having at least one disability, and nearly one-half reported taking pain medications daily.27 These supply-side explanations may be related to the drop in labor demand: the despair related to diminished prospects of a stable and quality job may lead to substance abuse and related health or mortality concerns.28
In addition, employment in non-metro areas tends to be more concentrated in manufacturing, which is the sector that has experienced the largest decline in employment from automation and globalization.29 Similarly, research suggests that workers in less populous areas have been more likely to be directly affected by increased import competition from China due to the geographical distribution of industries.30 And for many less populous areas, job opportunities are less diverse than in bigger cities, so that when a plant shuts down, there are fewer local alternative job opportunities for unemployed workers, especially with comparable levels of employment security or benefits.
These striking results naturally raise the question of whether we are seeing heightened migration from the less populous areas to the larger metros with greater economic opportunity.
A conventional assumption in economics is that regional differences should narrow over time as workers move toward areas where jobs are more plentiful and wages are higher.31 In reality, Americans' propensity to move is currently at its lowest level in many decades.
In 2016, the fraction of the population that had moved within the United States in the past year was 11 percent, down from 17 percent or more in the early 1980s, with the steepest decline in the fraction of people moving longer distances, across county or state lines.32 The evidence suggests that the decline in geographic mobility cannot be fully explained by population aging, by the housing boom and bust, by changes in the composition of industries, by the increasing ease of telecommuting from longer distances, or by the rise in dual-earner households which may make work-related relocation more difficult.
Some of the decline may be related to changes in the labor market, perhaps because workers are more likely to perceive that job opportunities are no better elsewhere, and consequently that the labor market returns to switching jobs or locations--in terms of better wages or higher job quality--have declined.33 Also, zoning requirements may be boosting housing costs in cities where job opportunities are most abundant, such as San Francisco, pricing out many potential workers and inhibiting migration.34
Whatever the reason, the fact that families are less likely to move now than in the past suggests that many of those in less populous areas are not able to access the economic opportunity present in denser and more diversified large metropolitan areas at a time when the gap in labor market outcomes for larger metros relative to other areas continues to grow.
The Federal Reserve is deeply engaged in understanding disparities through our data collection, research collaboration, and community development work.
One way the Federal Reserve seeks to obtain a clearer picture is by collecting data ourselves.
For instance, some of the data I have cited today come from the Federal Reserve's triennial Survey of Consumer Finances, which provides detailed information on income and wealth holdings by demographic groups.
The Survey of Household Economics and Decisionmaking provides a portrait of household finances, employment, housing, and debt; the Survey of Young Workers provides insights into younger adults' employment experiences soon after entering the labor force; and the Enterprising and Informal Work Activities Survey provides information about income generating activities that are often outside the scope of other employment and income surveys.35
Across the Federal Reserve System, a variety of initiatives are aimed at understanding economic disparities and how to foster more-inclusive growth.
The Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute at the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis brings together researchers from a variety of fields to analyze barriers to economic opportunity and advancement.
The Economic Growth and Mobility Project at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia aims to bring together researchers with community stakeholders to focus on differences in poverty and economic mobility across demographic characteristics.
The Investing in America's Workforce Initiative is a collaboration between the Federal Reserve System and academic research institutions to promote investment in workforce skills that better align with employers' needs.36
All of that brings me to today's conference, which I am confident will make an important contribution to this mission.
I am heartened to see so many researchers and practitioners from a variety of backgrounds focused on these important issues.
This conference is part of our efforts to hear from experts with diverse backgrounds and perspectives to better understand the nature and implications of labor market disparities.
A deeper understanding of labor market disparities is central to the mission of the Federal Reserve because it may help us better assess full employment, where resources may be underutilized, and the likely evolution of the labor market and overall economic activity.
We look forward to hearing what you have to say about these important questions and learning what other questions are in need of attention.
"Labor Force Participation: Recent Developments and Future Prospects," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp.
Employment Sag of the 2000s," Journal of Labor Economics, vol.
"Income Polarization in the United States (PDF)," IMF Working Paper 16/121.
Labor Market: Implications for Employment and Earnings (PDF)." Washington: Center for American Progress and Hamilton Project.
"The China Syndrome: Local Labor Market Effects of Import Competition in the United States," American Economic Review, vol.
"Untangling Trade and Technology: Evidence from Local Labor Markets," Economic Journal, vol.
Phillips Curve: Back to the 60s? (PDF)" Policy Brief PB16-1.
"Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the 57th National Association for Business Economics Annual Meeting, Washington, October 12.
"Why Opportunity and Inclusion Matter for America's Economic Strength," speech delivered at the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute Conference, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Minneapolis, Minnesota, May 22.
Family Finances from 2013 to 2016: Evidence from the Survey of Consumer Finances," Federal Reserve Bulletin.
"Racial Gaps in Labor Market Outcomes in the Last Four Decades and over the Business Cycle (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-071.
"Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"The Labor Force Participation Rate since 2007: Causes and Policy Implications (PDF)." Washington: Council of Economic Advisors, Executive Office of the President of the United States.
"The Long-Term Decline in Prime-Age Male Labor Force Participation (PDF)." Washington: Council of Economic Advisors, Executive Office of the President of the United States.
"Racial Inequality in the 21st Century: The Declining Significance of Discrimination," in David Card and Orley Ashenfelter, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, vol.
"The Economic Status of Rural America in the Trump Era," MPRA Paper 77830.
"Vital Signs: Changes in Opioid Prescribing in the United States, 2006–2015 (PDF)," Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, vol.
"Tarnishing the Golden and Empire States: Land-Use Regulations and the U.S.
"Understanding the Long-Run Decline in Interstate Migration," International Economic Review, vol.
"Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research," FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23.
"Where Have All the Workers Gone? An Inquiry into the Decline of the U.S.
"Internal Migration in the United States," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
"Job Changing and the Decline in Long-Distance Migration in the United States," Demography, vol.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November.
"Individual and Community Economic Mobility in the Great Recession Era: The Spatial Foundations of Persistent Inequality (PDF)," in Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis and Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, eds., Economic Mobility: Research and Ideas on Strengthening Families, Communities, and the Economy.
"Income and Poverty in the United States: 2016 (PDF)," Current Population Reports, pp.
"Labor Market Outcomes in Metropolitan and Non-metropolitan Areas: Signs of Growing Disparities," FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September 25.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
The FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy is available on the Board's website at https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/fomc_longerrungoals.pdf.
See Bernstein (2013) and Alichi, Kantenga, and Solè (2016) for more on the potential link between income and wealth inequality and consumer spending.
See Cajner and others (2017) for more on racial gaps and the labor market.
Data on recent estimates of unemployment rates for adult men (20 years and older) by race and ethnicity are available from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
See Goetz, Partridge, and Stephens (2017) and Economic Innovation Group (2016) for details on growing regional differences during the recovery.
The widening gap for average income and wealth, but not for median income and wealth, is because in larger metro areas income and wealth has become increasingly held by wealthier families.
Most analysis suggests that at least half of the decline in the aggregate labor force participation rate since 2007 is attributable to the aging of the population, with a significant portion of the decline that is not related to aging attributable to a longer-run decline in participation for younger individuals and prime-age men; for example, see Aaronson and others (2014) and the Council of Economic Advisors (2014).
For an overview of factors potentially attributable to the decline in labor force participation of prime-age men, see the Council of Economic Advisors (2016).
For examples of research on the recent labor market effects of technology and automation, see Autor, Dorn, and Hanson (2015) and Acemoglu and Restrepo (2017).
For national-level estimates of the labor market effects from cheaper Chinese imports, see Pierce and Schott (2016a) and Acemoglu and others (2016).
Krueger (forthcoming) describes evidence from a variety of surveys showing that a significant fraction of prime-age men who are out of the labor force report having pain, being in poor health, or taking medication related to this pain, and that these behaviors are far more common among prime-age men than prime-age women.
Based on staff analysis of publically available data from the Bureau of Economic Analysis on metropolitan and nonmetropolitan employment by industry.
Annual Geographic Mobility Rates, by Type of Movement: 1948-2016." Return to text
For a discussion of the multidecade decline in internal migration and its potential causes, see Molloy, Smith, and Wozniak (2011, 2017) and Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl (2017).
For information about the Opportunity and Inclusive Growth Institute, see https://www.minneapolisfed.org/institute, for information about the Economic Growth and Mobility Project, see https://www.philadelphiafed.org/egmp, and for information about the America's Workforce Initiative, see https://www.investinwork.org.


Understanding the Disconnect between Employment and Inflation with a Low Neutral Rate
At The Economic Club of New York New York, New York
economy remains on solid footing, against the backdrop of the first synchronized global economic growth we have seen in many years and accommodative financial conditions.
This benign outlook is clouded somewhat by uncertainty about government funding and the fiscal outlook, and geostrategic risk has risen.
The labor market continues to bring more Americans off the sidelines and into productive employment, which is a very welcome development.
Nonetheless, there is a notable disconnect between signs that the economy is in the neighborhood of full employment and a string of lower-than-projected inflation readings, especially since inflation has come in stubbornly below target for five years.
With normalization of the federal funds rate under way and the start of gradual balance sheet normalization widely anticipated, I will want to take some time to assess the path of the federal funds rate that will best support a sustainable move in inflation to our 2 percent goal.1 Sustainably achieving our inflation objective is especially important, given the apparent persistently low level of the neutral rate and the resulting limited room for maneuver above the effective lower bound.
Investment in the equipment and intellectual property category has risen at an annual rate of 6 percent so far this year after remaining roughly flat last year.
The latest data on orders and shipments of capital equipment suggest that solid growth will likely continue in the second half of the year.
While lackluster consumer spending was one of the key reasons for the weak increase in first-quarter gross domestic product (GDP), growth in personal consumption expenditures (PCE) bounced back strongly in the second quarter, and recent readings on retail sales suggest another solid increase in consumer spending this quarter.
Of course, the likely economic effects of Hurricane Harvey raise uncertainties about the economic outlook for the remainder of the year.
According to last Friday's labor market report, nonfarm payrolls have increased around 185,000 per month over the three months through August, about the same as the average monthly gains last year.
The unemployment rate has been roughly flat for the past several months at 4.4 percent, which is 1/2 percentage point lower than at the same time last year.
That said, we are seeing synchronized global economic growth for the first time in many years.
Foreign economies--including Canada, the euro area, and China--have posted robust GDP growth so far this year.
This improvement has been reflected here at home in dollar depreciation; higher earnings and stock prices; tighter risk spreads; and an increase in net exports, which made a small positive contribution in the first half of this year after holding down GDP growth over the past several years.
In addition, there are indications that, before too long, central banks in several major economies could begin normalizing monetary policy, in many cases through adjustments to their balance sheets as well as their policy rates.
Those changes in foreign monetary policies could have important implications for term premiums and, in turn, longer-term Treasury rates, depending on the timing and approach.2
economy and continued increases in resource utilization, core inflation, as measured by changes in the PCE price index for items other than food and energy, slowed by almost 1/2 percentage point relative to the pace a year ago.
Indeed, both overall and core inflation were only 1.4 percent for the year through July, well short of the Federal Open Market Committee's (FOMC) objective.
To what extent does it make sense to look through the recent low inflation readings on the grounds they are transitory? It appears that temporary factors, such as discounted cell phone plans, are pushing down inflation to some extent this year.
By the same token, it is likely that other temporary factors--for example, prescription drug prices--boosted inflation last year.
Going forward, we should see a temporary boost to headline inflation due to Hurricane Harvey's effect on gasoline prices that I mentioned earlier.
In contrast, what is troubling is five straight years in which inflation fell short of our target despite a sharp improvement in resource utilization.
It is instructive to put the shortfall in inflation in recent years in perspective by comparing inflation in the past few years with the last time the economy was in the neighborhood of full employment--namely, just before the financial crisis.
In particular, over the past three years, unemployment has averaged roughly 5 percent.
Similarly, over the three years ending in early 2007--before the unemployment rate started rising--the unemployment rate also averaged 5 percent.
Despite a similar degree of resource utilization, core inflation averaged 2.2 percent from 2004 to 2007, notably higher than the comparable three-year average inflation rate today of 1.5 percent.
Why is inflation so much lower now than it was previously? The fact that the period from 2004 to 2007 had inflation around target with similar unemployment rates casts some doubt on the likelihood that resource utilization is the primary explanation.3 Similarly, a 12-quarter average is typically long enough that temporary factors should not be the dominant concern.
One key factor that may have played a role in the past three years is the decline in import prices, reflecting the dollar's surge, especially in 2015.
By contrast, in the 2004‑07 period, non-oil import prices increased at roughly a 2 percent annual rate and had a more neutral effect on inflation.
Nonetheless, while the decline in non-oil import prices likely accounts for some of the weakness in inflation over the past few years, these prices have begun rising again in the past year at a time when inflation remains relatively low.
So if import prices, resource utilization, and transitory factors together do not provide a complete account, why has inflation been so much lower in the past few years than it was previously? In many of the models economists use to analyze inflation, a key feature is "underlying," or trend, inflation, which is believed to anchor the rate of inflation over a fairly long horizon.
Underlying inflation can be thought of as the slow-moving trend that exerts a strong pull on wage and price setting and is often viewed as related to some notion of longer-run inflation expectations.
There is no single highly reliable measure of that underlying trend or the closely associated notion of longer-run inflation expectations.
Nonetheless, a variety of measures suggest underlying trend inflation may currently be lower than it was before the crisis, contributing to the ongoing shortfall of inflation from our objective.
That conclusion is suggested by estimates based on time-series models, longer-run expectations from the University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers and Survey of Professional Forecasters, and market-based measures of inflation compensation.
Starting with time-series models, one model that has been used by a variety of researchers suggests that underlying trend inflation may have moved down by perhaps as much as 1/2 percentage point over the past decade.4 Market-based measures of inflation compensation provide another read on inflation expectations.
Comparing the three-year period ending in the second quarter of this year with the three-year period ended just before the financial crisis, 10-year-ahead inflation compensation based on TIPS (Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities) yields is 3/4 percentage point lower.5 Survey-based measures of inflation expectations are also lower.
The Michigan survey measure of median household expectations of inflation over the next five to 10 years suggests a 1/4 percentage point downward shift over the most recent three-year period compared with the pre-crisis years, similar to the five-year, five-year forward forecast for the consumer price index from the Survey of Professional Forecasters.
Why might underlying inflation expectations have moved down since the financial crisis? One simple explanation may be the experience of persistently low inflation: Households and firms have experienced a prolonged period of inflation below our objective, and that may be affecting their perception of underlying inflation.
A related explanation may be the greater proximity of the federal funds rate to its effective lower bound due to a lower neutral rate of interest.6 By constraining the amount of policy space available to offset adverse developments using our more effective conventional tools, the low neutral rate could increase the likely frequency of periods of below-trend inflation.
In short, frequent or extended periods of low inflation run the risk of pulling down private-sector inflation expectations.7
Given today's circumstances, with the economy near full employment and inflation below target, how should the FOMC achieve its dual-mandate goals? Some might determine that preemptive tightening is appropriate on the grounds that monetary policy operates with long lags, and inflation will inevitably accelerate as the labor market continues to tighten because of the Phillips curve.
However, in today's economy, there are reasons to worry that the Phillips curve will not prove very reliable in boosting inflation as resource utilization tightens.
Since 2012, inflation has tended to change relatively little as the unemployment rate has fallen considerably, from 8.2 percent to 4.4 percent.8 In short, the Phillips curve appears to be flatter today than it was previously.9 This is also apparent in a number of advanced foreign economies, where declines in their unemployment rates to relatively low levels have failed to generate significant upward pressures on inflation.10 Given the flatness of the Phillips curve, it could take a considerable undershooting of the natural rate of unemployment to achieve our inflation objective if we were to rely on resource utilization alone.
For all these reasons, achieving our inflation target on a sustainable basis is likely to require a firming in longer-run inflation expectations--that is, the underlying trend.
The key question in my mind is how to achieve an improvement in longer-run inflation expectations to a level that will allow us to achieve our inflation objective.
The persistent failure to meet our inflation objective should push us to think broadly about diagnoses and solutions.
The academic literature on monetary policy suggests a variety of prescriptions for preventing a lower neutral rate of interest from eroding longer-run inflation expectations.11 One feature that is common to many proposals is that the persistence of the shortfall in inflation from our objective should be one of the considerations in setting monetary policy.
Most immediately, we should assess inflation developments closely before making a determination on further adjustments to the federal funds rate.
A key upcoming decision for the Committee is when to commence balance sheet normalization.
I consider normalization of the federal funds rate to be well under way, the criterion for commencing balance sheet normalization.
The approaching change to our reinvestment policy has been clearly communicated and is well anticipated.
In principle, the FOMC could use both the balance sheet and the federal funds rate as active tools for setting monetary policy.
However, I view the federal funds rate as the preferred active tool, because its effect on financial conditions and the economy has been more extensively tested and therefore is better understood than changes to the balance sheet.
As a result, once we set in motion the change in balance sheet policy, as long as the economy evolves broadly as expected, we should allow the balance sheet to run off in the background at the gradual pace that was announced.
We would primarily look to ongoing adjustments in the federal funds rate to calibrate the stance of monetary policy as economic conditions evolve.
Once balance sheet normalization is under way, I will be looking closely at the evolution of inflation before making a determination about further adjustments to the federal funds rate.
We have been falling short of our inflation objective not just in the past year, but over a longer period as well.
My own view is that we should be cautious about tightening policy further until we are confident inflation is on track to achieve our target.
Unless we expect inflation to move quickly back toward target--or there are indications that the short-run neutral rate has moved up further--a variety of empirical estimates suggest we could approach neutral without too many additional rate increases.
Many forecasters assume that the neutral rate of interest is very low currently, and that it is likely to be low relative to historical norms in the longer run.12 For example, the well-known Laubach-Williams model currently suggests an estimate of the longer-run neutral federal funds rate that is actually slightly below zero.13 And in the most recent Summary of Economic Projections (SEP), the median longer-run nominal federal funds rate was 3 percent, which implies the long-run real federal funds rate would only be 1 percent, lower than its average in the decades before then of around 2-1/2 percent.14
These estimates suggest that the neutral rate of interest is likely to rise only modestly in the medium term.
It is worth remembering, in addition, that the Federal Reserve's balance sheet policy may be reinforcing this tendency over the next several years.
A recent study suggests balance sheet runoff could boost the level of the term premium on the 10-year Treasury yield by about 40 basis points over the first few years.15 Typical rules of thumb suggest that such an increase in term premiums would imply a decrease in the short-run neutral rate of interest.
Although the FOMC expects to begin normalizing its balance sheet relatively soon, several foreign central banks are continuing their purchases of longer-term assets in their own currencies.16 Because longer-term government securities in the major economies are close substitutes, the ongoing balance sheet programs of some foreign central banks will likely continue to hold down U.S.
But with economies abroad strengthening, it may not be too long before some foreign central banks will end their net purchases and, eventually, begin reducing their balance sheets.
As that happens, the current downward pressure on longer-term interest rates from foreign spillovers will abate.
For these reasons, my current expectation is that the short-run neutral rate of interest may not rise much over the medium term.
To the extent that the neutral rate remains low relative to its historical value, there is a high premium on guiding inflation back up to target so as to retain space to buffer adverse shocks with conventional policy.
In this regard, I believe it is important to be clear that we would be comfortable with inflation moving modestly above our target for a time.
In my view, this is the clear implication of the symmetric language in the Committee's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy.
Before concluding, it is worth considering the possible implications of a sustained period of low neutral rates and low unemployment for financial imbalances.
Historically, extended periods with very low unemployment rates tend to be associated with below-average spreads of expected returns on risky assets over safe interest rates--low bond risk premiums, for example, or low equity premiums.
Although, to some extent, low risk premiums and rising asset valuations may be consistent with strong economic fundamentals, such as low default rates and strong corporate earnings, there have also been episodes when a very strong economy and low unemployment rate have led to overvaluation of asset prices, underpricing of risk, and growing financial imbalances.
Thus, in today's environment, it is important to be vigilant to the signs that asset valuations appear to be elevated, especially in areas such as commercial real estate and corporate bonds, as well as the exceptionally low levels of expected volatility.
Nonetheless, there are few signs of a dangerous buildup of leverage or of maturity transformation, which have traditionally been important contributors to financial instability.
This is due, in no small measure, to the improvements in capital, liquidity, and risk management made by the financial institutions at the core of the system, which are associated with post-crisis financial reforms, as well as money market reform and the greater transparency in the derivatives markets.
If, as many forecasters assume, the current shortfall of inflation from our 2 percent objective indeed proves transitory, further gradual increases in the federal funds rate would be warranted, perhaps along the lines of the median projection from the most recent SEP.
But, as I noted earlier, I am concerned that the recent low readings for inflation may be driven by depressed underlying inflation, which would imply a more persistent shortfall in inflation from our objective.
In that case, it would be prudent to raise the federal funds rate more gradually.
"The Effect of the Federal Reserve's Securities Holdings on Longer-Term Interest Rates," FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 20.
"Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate Is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, California, Dec.
"The "New Normal" and What it Means for Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the Chicago Council on Foreign Affairs, Chicago, Ill., September 12.
"Cross-Border Spillovers of Balance Sheet Normalization," speech delivered at the National Bureau of Economic Research's Monetary Economics Summer Institute, Cambridge, Mass., July 13.
Deflating Inflation Expectations: The Implications of Inflation's Simple Dynamics (PDF), report prepared for the 2017 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago's Booth School of Business, held in New York, N.Y., on March 3.
"The Dog that Didn't Bark: Has Inflation Been Muzzled or Is It Just Sleeping (PDF)," in World Economic Outlook April 2013: Hopes Realities, and Risks.
"Low Inflation in the United States: A Summary of Recent Research," FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November 23.
"Monetary Policy in a Low Interest Rate World (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-080.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"The Risk-Adjusted Monetary Policy Rule (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-061.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
Inflation Become Harder to Forecast?" Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
According to Congressional Budget Office estimates, the natural rate of unemployment was about the same in the two periods: It was 4.8 percent in the 2014-17 period and 5.0 percent a decade earlier.
Stock and Watson (2007) introduced an estimate of trend inflation that assumed time-varying volatility.
Cecchetti and others (2017) provided a recent update of that model; their estimate of trend inflation for core PCE prices has been about 1-1/2 percent in the past few years, compared with readings above 2 percent in the 2006-08 period (see figure 4.1, p.
Of course, inflation compensation isn't a straight read on inflation expectations, as liquidity and term premiums can affect it.
The inflation information refers to core PCE inflation measured on a 12-month average basis.
Similarly, inflation did not fall very much as the unemployment rate climbed to 10 percent during the Great Recession.
See, for example, the July 2017 Survey of Market Participants (PDF) from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Over the 1960-2007 period, the real federal funds rate--measured as the nominal federal funds rate less trailing four-quarter core PCE inflation--averaged 2-1/2 percent.
For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2017), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC statement," press release, July 26.

Thank you to President Evans for inviting me to speak here today about the role of boards of directors of large banking firms.1 Ten years ago this month, the world witnessed the first tremors of what we now think of as the Global Financial Crisis and the subsequent Great Recession.
For the United States and many other countries, this would turn out to be the most painful economic period since the Great Depression.
In the United States, the core elements of those reforms included significantly higher capital standards; new liquidity requirements; forward-looking stress tests; and resolution planning.
Our largest banking firms are without question much stronger than before the crisis.
During the crisis, some large banking firms incurred massive losses.
After the crisis, the Federal Reserve significantly raised our expectations for the boards of directors of large banking firms.
Taking risk in service of clients is an essential part of the business of banking, including credit risk, interest rate risk, and various forms of operational risk.
Our reforms were designed to assure that boards of directors understand and approve the strategy of the company and the risks inherent in that strategy, and that the institution has the capital, liquidity, and risk management capabilities necessary to manage those risks.
Today, the role of a director of a large banking firm is more expansive, more challenging, and more important than ever.
Boards now oversee management's participation in highly challenging annual exercises, such as stress testing, capital planning, and resolution planning, that have fundamentally changed the business of our largest institutions.
Boards now more carefully evaluate the compensation practices of these large institutions to assure that they reinforce positive incentives and discourage unwanted risk taking.
For example, while directors generally say that they understand and embrace their more challenging responsibilities, we consistently hear that directors feel buried in hundreds or even thousands of pages of highly granular information, to the point where more important strategic issues are crowded out of board deliberations.
Some of this granular information was likely driven by our supervisory guidance, which included specific expectations not only for the management of the institution, but also for the board of directors.
Over time, this guidance has increased the number of specific directives aimed at boards well into the hundreds, which may have fostered a "check-the-box" approach by boards.
Our current ratings system for bank holding companies, which for large banking firms would be replaced by the currently proposed LFI ratings system, refers to the "board and senior management" as a subcomponent rating of risk management.3 We have also combined the roles of the board and senior management in many of our supervisory feedback letters.
Let me start by saying what the new approach will not do.
The new approach distinguishes the board from senior management so that we can spotlight our expectations of effective boards.
The intent is to enable directors to spend less board time on routine matters and more on core board responsibilities: overseeing management as they devise a clear and coherent direction for the firm, holding management accountable for the execution of that strategy, and ensuring the independence and stature of the risk management and internal audit functions.
This principles-based approach recognizes that large firms have a broad range of business models, structures, and practices.
Alignment of business strategy and risk appetite should minimize the firm's exposure to large and unexpected losses.
In addition, the firm's risk management capabilities need to be commensurate with the risks it expects to take.
Third, an effective board should hold senior management accountable for implementing the firm's strategy and risk appetite and maintaining the firm's risk management and control framework.
Fourth, an effective board should ensure the independence and stature of the independent risk management and internal audit functions.
Risk management systems and controls may discourage or limit certain revenue-generating opportunities.
Failure to ensure the independence of these functions from the revenue generators and risk takers has been shown to be dangerous, and this is something for which the board is accountable.
Finally, an effective board should have a composition, governance structure, and set of established practices that are appropriate in light of the firm's size, complexity, scope of operations, and risk profile.
An effective board takes a preventative approach and engages in probing self-assessments regularly and systematically.
When we began that practice in 2013, our intention was to ensure that directors were in a position to hold management accountable in addressing risk management shortcomings.
By 2014, we realized that the practice was "almost surely distracting from strategic and risk-related analyses and oversight by boards".6 For perspective, a large banking firm may have one hundred or more MRAs outstanding at a given time, many of which are at a level of granularity that is more appropriate for management to remediate, with board oversight.
While we have proposed that most MRAs and MRIAs be addressed in the first instance to management and not to the board, the board would continue to receive MRAs where board practices are at issue or where management has failed to promptly and adequately take the required actions.
The board would also continue to receive copies of examination and inspection reports, including formal communications with the institution.
We need financial institutions that are strong enough to support economic growth by lending through the economic cycle.
To achieve that goal, we need strong and effective boards of directors at firms of all sizes.
A strong and effective board provides strategic leadership and oversight, which is much more challenging and important than checking off lists of assigned tasks.
The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Powell, "Relationship Between Regulation and Economic Growth," (testimony before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S.
MRIAs are matters of significant importance and urgency that the Federal Reserve requires banking organizations to address immediately and include, for example, matters that have the potential to pose significant risk to the safety and soundness of the banking organization, matters that represent significant noncompliance with applicable laws or regulations and repeat criticisms that have escalated in importance due to insufficient attention or inaction by the banking organization.
MRAs, on the other hand, are matters that are important and that the Federal Reserve is expecting a banking organization to address over a reasonable period of time, but when the timing need not be "immediate." See Supervision and Regulation (SR) letter 13-13/Consumer Affairs letter 13-10, "Supervisory Considerations for the Communication of Supervisory Findings." Return to text
("We should probably be somewhat more selective in creating the regulatory checklist for board compliance and regular consideration.
One example, drawn from Federal Reserve practice, is the recent supervisory guidance requiring that every notice of a "Matter Requiring Attention" (MRA) issued by supervisors must be reviewed, and compliance signed off, by the board of directors.
There are some MRAs that clearly should come to the board's attention, but the failure to discriminate among them is almost surely distracting from strategic and risk-related analyses and oversight by boards.") Return to text

Financial Stability a Decade after the Onset of the Crisis
At "Fostering a Dynamic Global Recovery," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming
A decade has passed since the beginnings of a global financial crisis that resulted in the most severe financial panic and largest contraction in economic activity in the United States since the Great Depression.
Today I will look back at the crisis and discuss the reforms policymakers in the United States and around the world have made to improve financial regulation to limit both the probability and the adverse consequences of future financial crises.
A resilient financial system is critical to a dynamic global economy--the subject of this conference.
A well-functioning financial system facilitates productive investment and new business formation and helps new and existing businesses weather the ups and downs of the business cycle.
Because of the reforms that strengthened our financial system, and with support from monetary and other policies, credit is available on good terms, and lending has advanced broadly in line with economic activity in recent years, contributing to today's strong economy.1
The risk of runs owing to maturity transformation is reduced.
Efforts to enhance the resolvability of systemic firms have promoted market discipline and reduced the problem of too-big-to-fail.
And a system is in place to more effectively monitor and address risks that arise outside the regulatory perimeter.
Nonetheless, the scope and complexity of financial regulatory reforms demand that policymakers and researchers remain alert to both areas for improvement and unexpected side effects.
The Federal Reserve is committed to continuing to evaluate the effects of regulation on financial stability and on the broader economy and to making appropriate adjustments.
After reviewing these steps, I will summarize indicators and research that show the improved resilience of the U.S.
financial system--resilience that is due importantly to regulatory reform as well as actions taken by the private sector.
I will then turn to the evidence regarding how financial regulatory reform has affected economic growth, credit availability, and market liquidity.
and global financial system was in a dangerous place 10 years ago.
house prices had peaked in 2006, and strains in the subprime mortgage market grew acute over the first half of 2007.2 By August, liquidity in money markets had deteriorated enough to require the Federal Reserve to take steps to support it.3 And yet the discussion here at Jackson Hole in August 2007, with a few notable exceptions, was fairly optimistic about the possible economic fallout from the stresses apparent in the financial system.4
As we now know, the deterioration of liquidity and solvency within the financial sector continued over the next 13 months.
As a result, policymakers took extraordinary measures: The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) sharply cut the federal funds rate, and the Federal Reserve, in coordination with the Treasury Department and other agencies, extended liquidity facilities beyond the traditional banking sector, applying to the modern structure of U.S.
But the deterioration from early 2007 until early September 2008‑‑already the worst financial disruption in the United States in many decades‑‑was a slow trickle compared with the tidal wave that nearly wiped out the financial sector that September and led to a plunge in economic activity in the following months­.
Not long after Fannie and Freddie were placed in government conservatorship, Lehman Brothers collapsed, setting off a week in which American International Group, Inc.
(AIG), came to the brink of failure and required large loans from the Federal Reserve to mitigate the systemic fallout; a large money market fund "broke the buck" (that is, was unable to maintain a net asset value of $1 per share) and runs on other money funds accelerated, requiring the Treasury to provide a guarantee of money fund liabilities; global dollar funding markets nearly collapsed, necessitating coordinated action by central banks around the world; the two remaining large investment banks became bank holding companies, thereby ending the era of large independent investment banks in the United States; and the Treasury proposed a rescue of the financial sector.
Within several weeks, the Congress passed--and President Bush signed into law--the Emergency Economic Stabilization Act of 2008, which established the $700 billion Troubled Asset Relief Program; the Federal Reserve initiated further emergency lending programs; and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) guaranteed a broad range of bank debt.7 Facing similar challenges in their own jurisdictions, many foreign governments also undertook aggressive measures to support the functioning of credit markets, including large-scale capital injections into banks, expansions of deposit insurance programs, and guarantees of some forms of bank debt.
Despite the forceful policy responses by the Treasury, the Congress, the FDIC, and the Federal Reserve as well as authorities abroad, the crisis continued to intensify: The vulnerabilities in the U.S.
and global economies had grown too large, and the subsequent damage was enormous.
From the beginning of 2008 to early 2010, nearly 9 million jobs, on net, were lost in the United States.
economy: Global trade and economic activity contracted to a degree that had not been seen since the 1930s.
The economic recovery that followed, despite extraordinary policy actions, was painfully slow.
The Congress, the Administration, and regulatory agencies implemented new laws, regulations, and supervisory practices to limit the risk of another crisis, in coordination with policymakers around the world.
The vulnerabilities within the financial system in the mid-2000s were numerous and, in hindsight, familiar from past financial panics.
Financial institutions had assumed too much risk, especially related to the housing market, through mortgage lending standards that were far too lax and contributed to substantial overborrowing.
The long period of economic stability beginning in the 1980s had led to complacency about potential risks, and the buildup of risk was not widely recognized.8 As a result, market and supervisory discipline was lacking, and financial institutions were allowed to take on high levels of leverage.
This leverage was facilitated by short-term wholesale borrowing, owing in part to market-based vehicles, such as money market mutual funds and asset-backed commercial paper programs that allowed the rapid expansion of liquidity transformation outside of the regulated depository sector.
As a result, securitization and the development of complex derivatives products distributed risk across institutions in ways that were opaque and ultimately destabilizing.
The United States, through coordinated regulatory action and legislation, moved very rapidly to begin reforming our financial system, and the speed with which our banking system returned to health provides evidence of the effectiveness of that strategy.
leadership of global efforts through bodies such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Financial Stability Board (FSB), and the Group of Twenty has contributed to the development of standards that promote financial stability around the world, thereby supporting global growth while protecting the U.S.
Preeminent among these domestic and global efforts have been steps to increase the loss-absorbing capacity of banks, regulations to limit both maturity transformation in short-term funding markets and liquidity mismatches within banks, and new authorities to facilitate the resolution of large financial institutions and to subject systemically important firms to more stringent prudential regulation.
Several important reforms have increased the loss-absorbing capacity of global banks.
First, the quantity and quality of capital required relative to risk-weighted assets have been increased substantially.9 In addition, a simple leverage ratio provides a backstop, reflecting the lesson imparted by past crises that risk weights are imperfect and a minimum amount of equity capital should fund a firm's total assets.
Moreover, both the risk-weighted and simple leverage requirements are higher for the largest, most systemic firms, which lowers the risk of distress at such firms and encourages them to limit activities that could threaten financial stability.10 Finally, the largest U.S.
banks participate in the annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR)‑‑the stress tests.
In addition to contributing to greater loss-absorbing capacity, the CCAR improves public understanding of risks at large banking firms, provides a forward-looking examination of firms' potential losses during severely adverse economic conditions, and has contributed to significant improvements in risk management.
The fragility created by deposit-like liabilities outside the traditional banking sector has been mitigated by regulations promulgated by the Securities and Exchange Commission affecting prime institutional money market funds.
These rules require these prime funds to use a floating net asset value, among other changes, a shift that has made these funds less attractive as cash-management vehicles.
The changes at money funds have also helped reduce banks' reliance on unsecured short-term wholesale funding, since prime institutional funds were significant investors in those bank liabilities.
Liquidity risk at large banks has been further mitigated by a new liquidity coverage ratio and a capital surcharge for global systemically important banks (G-SIBs).
The liquidity coverage ratio requires that banks hold liquid assets to cover potential net cash outflows over a 30-day stress period.
G-SIBs links the required level of capital for the largest banks to their reliance on short-term wholesale funding.11
While improvements in capital and liquidity regulation will limit the reemergence of the risks that grew substantially in the mid-2000s, the failure of Lehman Brothers demonstrated how the absence of an adequate resolution process for dealing with a failing systemic firm left policymakers with only the terrible choices of a bailout or allowing a destabilizing collapse.
In recognition of this shortcoming, the Congress adopted the orderly liquidation authority in Title II of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) to provide an alternative resolution mechanism for systemically important firms to be used instead of bankruptcy proceedings when necessary to preserve financial stability.
The orderly liquidation authority contains a number of tools, including liquidity resources and temporary stays on the termination of financial contracts, that would help protect the financial system and economy from the severe adverse spillovers that could occur if a systemic firm failed.
Importantly, any losses incurred by the government in an Orderly Liquidation Authority resolution would not be at the expense of taxpayers, since the statute provides that all such losses must be borne by other large financial firms through subsequent assessments.
In addition, the Congress required that the largest banks submit living wills that describe how they could be resolved under bankruptcy.12 And the Federal Reserve has mandated that systemically important banks meet total loss-absorbing capacity requirements, which require these firms to maintain long-term debt adequate to absorb losses and recapitalize the firm in resolution.
These enhancements in resolvability protect financial stability and help ensure that the shareholders and creditors of failing firms bear losses.
Moreover, these steps promote market discipline, as creditors--knowing full well that they will bear losses in the event of distress--demand prudent risk-taking, thereby limiting the problem of too-big-to-fail.
Financial stability risks can also grow large outside the regulated banking sector, as amply demonstrated by the events of 2007 and 2008.
In response, a number of regulatory changes affecting what is commonly referred to as the shadow banking sector have been instituted.
A specific example of such risks, illustrative of broader developments, was the buildup of large counterparty exposures through derivatives between market participants and AIG that were both inappropriately risk-managed and opaque.
To mitigate the potential for such risks to arise again, new standards require central clearing of standardized over-the-counter derivatives, enhanced reporting requirements for all derivatives, and higher capital as well as margin requirements for noncentrally cleared derivatives transactions.13
Another important step was the Congress's creation of the Financial Stability Oversight Council (FSOC).
The council is responsible for identifying risks to financial stability and for designating those financial institutions that are systemically important and thus subject to prudential regulation by the Federal Reserve.
Both of these responsibilities are important to help guard against the risk that vulnerabilities outside the existing regulatory perimeter grow to levels that jeopardize financial stability.14
The evidence shows that reforms since the crisis have made the financial system substantially safer.
Loss-absorbing capacity among the largest banks is significantly higher, with Tier 1 common equity capital more than doubling from early 2009 to now.15 The annual stress-testing exercises in recent years have led to improvements in the capital positions and risk-management processes among participating banks.
Large banks have cut their reliance on short-term wholesale funding essentially in half and hold significantly more high-quality, liquid assets.
Assets under management at prime institutional money market funds that proved susceptible to runs in the crisis have decreased substantially.
And the ability of regulators to resolve a large institution has improved, reflecting both new authorities and tangible steps taken by institutions to adjust their organizational and capital structure in a manner that enhances their resolvability and significantly reduces the problem of too-big-to-fail.
The progress evident in regulatory and supervisory metrics has been accompanied by shifts in private-sector assessments that also suggest enhanced financial stability.
Credit default swaps for the large banks also suggest that market participants assign a low probability to the distress of a large U.S.
banks have moved up in recent years, and market-based measures of equity now lie in the range of book estimates of equity.
To be sure, market-based measures may not reflect true risks--they certainly did not in the mid-2000s--and hence the observed improvements should not be overemphasized.16 But supervisory metrics are not perfect, either, and policymakers and investors should continue to monitor a range of supervisory and market-based indicators of financial system resilience.
Economic research provides further support for the notion that reforms have made the system safer.
Studies have demonstrated that higher levels of bank capital mitigate the risk and adverse effects of financial crises.17 Moreover, researchers have highlighted how liquidity regulation supports financial stability by complementing capital regulation.18 Economic models of the resilience of the financial sector--so called top-down stress-testing models--reinforce the message from supervisory stress tests that the riskiness of large banks has diminished over the past decade.19 Similarly, model-based analyses indicate that the risk of adverse fire sale spillovers across banks or broker-dealers have been substantially mitigated.20
I suspect many in this audience would agree with the narrative of my remarks so far: The events of the crisis demanded action, needed reforms were implemented, and these reforms have made the system safer.
Now--a decade from the onset of the crisis and nearly seven years since the passage of the Dodd-Frank Act and international agreement on the key banking reforms--a new question is being asked: Have reforms gone too far, resulting in a financial system that is too burdened to support prudent risk-taking and economic growth?
The Federal Reserve is committed individually, and in coordination with other U.S.
government agencies through forums such as the FSOC and internationally through bodies such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and the FSB, to evaluating the effects of financial market regulations and considering appropriate adjustments.
Furthermore, the Federal Reserve has independently taken steps to evaluate potential adjustments to its regulatory and supervisory practices.
For example, the Federal Reserve initiated a review of its stress tests following the 2015 cycle, and this review suggested changes to reduce the burden on participating institutions, especially smaller institutions, and to better align the supervisory stress tests with regulatory capital requirements.21 In addition, a broader set of changes to the new financial regulatory framework may deserve consideration.
Such changes include adjustments that may simplify regulations applying to small and medium-sized banks and enhance resolution planning.22
More broadly, we continue to monitor economic conditions, and to review and conduct research, to better understand the effect of regulatory reforms and possible implications for regulation.
I will briefly summarize the current state of play in two areas: the effect of regulation on credit availability and on changes in market liquidity.
The effects of capital regulation on credit availability have been investigated extensively.
Some studies suggest that higher capital weighs on banks' lending, while others suggest that higher capital supports lending.23 Such conflicting results in academic research are not altogether surprising.
It is difficult to identify the effects of regulatory capital requirements on lending because material changes to capital requirements are rare and are often precipitated, as in the recent case, by financial crises that also have large effects on lending.
Given the uncertainty regarding the effect of capital regulation on lending, rulemakings of the Federal Reserve and other agencies were informed by analyses that balanced the possible stability gains from greater loss-absorbing capacity against the possible adverse effects on lending and economic growth.24 This ex ante assessment pointed to sizable net benefits to economic growth from higher capital standards--and subsequent research supports this assessment.25 The steps to improve the capital positions of banks promptly and significantly following the crisis, beginning with the 2009 Supervisory Capital Assessment Program, have resulted in a return of lending growth and profitability among U.S.
While material adverse effects of capital regulation on broad measures of lending are not readily apparent, credit may be less available to some borrowers, especially homebuyers with less-than-perfect credit histories and, perhaps, small businesses.
Currently, many factors are likely affecting mortgage lending, including changes in market perceptions of the risk associated with mortgage lending; changes in practices at the government-sponsored enterprises and the Federal Housing Administration; changes in technology that may be contributing to entry by nonbank lenders; changes in consumer protection regulations; and, perhaps to a limited degree, changes in capital and liquidity regulations within the banking sector.
Credit appears broadly available to small businesses with solid credit histories, although indicators point to some difficulties facing firms with weak credit scores and insufficient credit histories.26 Small business formation is critical to economic dynamism and growth.
Smaller firms rely disproportionately on lending from smaller banks, and the Federal Reserve has been taking steps and examining additional steps to reduce unnecessary complexity in regulations affecting smaller banks.27
Finally, many financial market participants have expressed concerns about the ability to transact in volume at low cost--that is, about market liquidity, particularly in certain fixed-income markets such as that for corporate bonds.
Market liquidity for corporate bonds remains robust overall, and the healthy condition of the market is apparent in low bid-ask spreads and the large volume of corporate bond issuance in recent years.
Large dealers appear to devote less of their balance sheets to holding inventories of securities to facilitate trades and instead increasingly facilitate trades by directly matching buyers and sellers.
In addition, algorithmic traders and institutional investors are a larger presence in various markets than previously, and the willingness of these institutions to support liquidity in stressful conditions is uncertain.
While no single factor appears to be the predominant cause of the evolution of market liquidity, some regulations may be affecting market liquidity somewhat.
There may be benefits to simplifying aspects of the Volcker rule, which limits proprietary trading by banking firms, and to reviewing the interaction of the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio with risk-based capital requirements.
At the same time, the new regulatory framework overall has made dealers more resilient to shocks, and, in the past, distress at dealers following adverse shocks has been an important factor driving market illiquidity.
As a result, any adjustments to the regulatory framework should be modest and preserve the increase in resilience at large dealers and banks associated with the reforms put in place in recent years.
So where do we stand a decade after the onset of the most severe financial crisis since the Great Depression? Substantial progress has been made toward the Federal Reserve's economic objectives of maximum employment and price stability, in putting in place a regulatory and supervisory structure that is well designed to lower the risks to financial stability, and in actually achieving a stronger financial system.
Our more resilient financial system is better prepared to absorb, rather than amplify, adverse shocks, as has been illustrated during periods of market turbulence in recent years.
Enhanced resilience supports the ability of banks and other financial institutions to lend, thereby supporting economic growth through good times and bad.
The balance of research suggests that the core reforms we have put in place have substantially boosted resilience without unduly limiting credit availability or economic growth.
But many reforms have been implemented only fairly recently, markets continue to adjust, and research remains limited.
The Federal Reserve is committed to evaluating where reforms are working and where improvements are needed to most efficiently maintain a resilient financial system.
Moreover, I expect that the evolution of the financial system in response to global economic forces, technology, and, yes, regulation will result sooner or later in the all-too-familiar risks of excessive optimism, leverage, and maturity transformation reemerging in new ways that require policy responses.
We can never be sure that new crises will not occur, but if we keep this lesson fresh in our memories--along with the painful cost that was exacted by the recent crisis--and act accordingly, we have reason to hope that the financial system and economy will experience fewer crises and recover from any future crisis more quickly, sparing households and businesses some of the pain they endured during the crisis that struck a decade ago.
Over the 12 quarters ending in the first quarter of this year, borrowing by the nonfinancial business sector increased at an annual rate just above 6 percent, on average, and borrowing by households and nonprofit institutions rose at an annual rate of 3-1/4 percent, on average; the corresponding average pace of increase in nominal gross domestic product was 3-3/4 percent.
Over the same period, lending by private depository institutions advanced at an annual rate of nearly 6-1/2 percent.
A contemporaneous perspective on subprime mortgage market developments at this time is provided in Ben S.
Bernanke (2007), "The Subprime Mortgage Market," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago's 43rd Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Chicago, May 17.
On August 17, 2007, the Federal Reserve Board reduced the primary credit rate at the discount window by 50 basis points and announced a change to the Reserve Banks' usual practices to allow the provision of term financing for as long as 30 days, renewable by the borrower.
The changes were announced to remain in place until the Federal Reserve determined that market liquidity had improved materially.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007), "Federal Reserve Board Discount Rate Action," press release, August 17.
See Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (2007), Housing, Housing Finance, and Monetary Policy, proceedings of an economic policy symposium (Kansas City: FRBKC).
For a discussion of the correspondence between the steps taken by the Federal Reserve and those suggested by Walter Bagehot in the 19th century, see Brian F.
Madigan (2009), "Bagehot's Dictum in Practice: Formulating and Implementing Policies to Combat the Financial Crisis," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's annual economic symposium, Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 21.
A timeline of developments in the United States over the financial crisis is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
The failure of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac is marked by the decision of the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA) to place Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in government conservatorship on September 7, 2008.
In the fall of 2008, the three largest investment banks were (in alphabetical order) Goldman Sachs, Merrill Lynch, and Morgan Stanley.
Merrill Lynch agreed to be acquired by Bank of America, and the remaining two firms became bank holding companies.
The notion that economic stability can generate a buildup of imbalances that subsequently contributes to instability is presented in Hyman P.
The regulatory requirements for capital have been increased and focus on Tier 1 common equity, which proved more capable of absorbing losses than lower-quality forms of capital.
The role of bank internal models in determining risk-weighted assets also has been significantly constrained in the United States.
In addition, exposures previously considered off balance sheet have been incorporated into risk-weighted assets.
The Federal Reserve Board, the FDIC, and the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency adopted a final rule to strengthen the leverage ratio standards for the largest, most interconnected U.S.
Under the final rule, covered bank holding companies must maintain a leverage buffer of 2 percentage points above the minimum supplementary leverage ratio requirement of 3 percent, for a total of 5 percent, to avoid restrictions on capital distributions and discretionary bonus payments (see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2014), "Agencies Adopt Enhanced Supplementary Leverage Ratio Final Rule and Issue Supplementary Leverage Ratio Notice of Proposed Rulemaking," joint press release, April 8).
The Federal Reserve approved a final rule imposing risk-based capital surcharges on the largest, most systemically important U.S.
bank holding companies on July 20, 2015; in connection with the final rule, the Board issued a white paper describing the calibration of the risk-based capital surcharges (see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), "Federal Reserve Board Approves Final Rule Requiring the Largest, Most Systemically Important U.S.
Bank Holding Companies to Further Strengthen Their Capital Positions," press release, July 20).
Moreover, the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review, in which supervisors analyze the liquidity risks and practices at large banks, has promoted improvements in liquidity-risk management.
banking agencies also have proposed a net stable funding ratio (NSFR) to help ensure that large banks have a stable funding profile over a one-year horizon, and we are working toward finalization of the NSFR.
In addition to these steps, the Board issued another proposal to make G-SIBs more resolvable in May of last year (see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2016), "Federal Reserve Board Proposes Rule to Support U.S.
Financial Stability by Enhancing the Resolvability of Very Large and Complex Financial Firms," press release, May 3).
The proposed restrictions are a key step toward G-SIB resolvability because rapidly unwinding these contracts could destabilize the financial system by causing asset fire sales and toppling other firms.
One area in which regulations have shifted to a lesser degree in the United States is that of time-varying macroprudential tools, in which regulatory requirements are adjusted to address changes in vulnerabilities that may affect the financial system.
regulatory authorities have adopted rules that allow use of the countercyclical capital buffer, but other time-varying tools are limited in the United States.
This issue is discussed in, for example, Stanley Fischer (2015), "Macroprudential Policy in the U.S.
Economy," speech delivered at "Macroprudential Monetary Policy," 59th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, October 2.
For example, the FSOC contributed, through its identification process, to the development of the Securities and Exchange Commission reforms affecting money market funds.
The FSOC has also designated four firms as systemically important--AIG, GE Capital, Prudential, and MetLife.
GE Capital chose to shrink, adjust its business model, and reduce its footprint in short-term wholesale funding markets--and hence reduce a source of systemic risk.
These actions caused the FSOC to subsequently remove its designation as systemically important last year--illustrating how the designation process allows both identifying systemic firms and removing such designations when appropriate.
The increase in Tier 1 common equity among bank holding companies has been sizable, especially for the largest banks.
If the largest banks are defined as either the eight U.S.
bank holding companies that participated in the CCAR in 2017 (and for which data are available for 2009:Q1), Tier 1 common equity has more than doubled in dollar terms and relative to risk-weighted assets from the first quarter of 2009 to the most recent observations.
For example, Natasha Sarin and Lawrence Summers have reviewed market-based measures of bank equity and related measures of bank risks and concluded that such measures have not improved since the mid-2000s.
This assessment may understate the improvement in fundamental risk within the banking sector, as it takes the elevated valuations and low assessment of default risk implied by market prices during the earlier period as indicative of fundamentals.
Despite these shortcomings, their analysis is a useful reminder of the importance of considering both regulatory metrics and assessments implied by market prices.
Summers (2016), "Understanding Bank Risk through Market Measures (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp.
For example, see the review of evidence in Simon Firestone, Amy Lorenc, and Ben Ranish (2017), "An Empirical Economic Assessment of the Costs and Benefits of Bank Capital in the US (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-034 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April).
Some research is less supportive of the role of bank capital in limiting the risk of financial crises but suggests that higher levels of bank capital limit the economic costs of a financial crisis (for example, Òscar Jordà, Björn Richter, Moritz Schularick, and Alan M.
Taylor (2017), "Bank Capital Redux: Solvency, Liquidity, and Crisis," NBER Working Paper Series 23287 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March)).
Vardoulakis (2013), "An Integrated Framework for Analyzing Multiple Financial Regulations," International Journal of Central Banking, supp.
Mehmet Ozsoy (2016), "Bank Regulation under Fire Sale Externalities (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-026 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April).
For example, researchers at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York have developed a top-down stress-testing model, and simulation results from the model suggest that the resilience of the U.S.
banking system has improved since the crisis; see Beverly Hirtle, Anna Kovner, James Vickery, and Meru Bhanot (2014), "Assessing Financial Stability: The Capital and Loss Assessment under Stress Scenarios (CLASS) Model (PDF)," Staff Report 663 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, February; revised July 2015).
For example, see Fernando Duarte and Thomas Eisenbach (2013), "Fire-Sale Spillovers and Systemic Risk (PDF)," Staff Report 645 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, October; revised February 2015).
In response to the Federal Reserve's review and other information, the Board finalized a rule adjusting its capital plan and stress-testing rules, effective for the 2017 cycle, on January 30, 2017.
The final rule removes large and noncomplex firms from the qualitative assessment of the Federal Reserve's CCAR, reducing significant burden on these firms and focusing the qualitative review in CCAR on the largest, most complex financial institutions.
More generally, changes to improve regulatory and supervisory practices related to stress testing by reducing unnecessary burden while preserving resilience are under consideration.
Tarullo (2016), "Next Steps in the Evolution of Stress Testing," speech delivered at the Yale University School of Management Leaders Forum, New Haven, Conn., September 26.
Powell (2017), "Relationship between Regulation and Economic Growth," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S.
In addition, the Federal Reserve Board has continued to engage in international efforts to assess the effects of reforms and possible adjustments; in this context, the FSB has developed a framework for the post-implementation evaluation of the effects of the Group of Twenty financial regulatory reforms; see Financial Stability Board (2017), Framework for Post-Implementation Evaluation of the Effects of the G20 Financial Regulatory Reforms (PDF) (Basel, Switzerland: FSB, July).
Lown (1991), "The Credit Crunch," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, no.
Research finding a sizable negative relationship between capital requirements and lending includes Shekhar Aiyar, Charles W.
Calomiris, and Tomasz Wieladek (2014), "Does Macro-Prudential Regulation Leak? Evidence from a UK Policy Experiment," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
Research finding little relationship between lending and capital ratios (outside financial crises) includes Mark Carlson, Hui Shan, and Missaka Warusawitharana (2013), "Capital Ratios and Bank Lending: A Matched Bank Approach," Journal of Financial Intermediation, vol.
Research suggesting that higher capital levels may increase lending includes Leonardo Gambacorta and Hyun Song Shin (2016), "Why Bank Capital Matters for Monetary Policy (PDF)," BIS Working Papers 558 (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, April).
For example, see Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010), An Assessment of the Long-Term Economic Impact of Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements (PDF) (Basel, Switzerland: BCBS, August); and Macroeconomic Assessment Group (2010), Interim Report: Assessing the Macroeconomic Impact of the Transition to Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements (PDF) (Basel, Switzerland: MAG, August).
The ex ante studies from the Basel Committee and the Macroeconomic Assessment Group referenced in note 24 pointed to sizable net benefits from higher capital requirements.
More academic research pointing to similar conclusions using macroeconomic models (and typically focused on model-specific measures of economic welfare) includes Michael T.
Sim (2014), "Bank Capital and the Macroeconomy: Policy Considerations," Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, vol.
Vardoulakis (2015), "Capital Regulation in a Macroeconomic Model with Three Layers of Default," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
11 (June), pages 9-63; and Juliane Begenau (2016), "Capital Requirements, Risk Choice, and Liquidity Provision in a Business Cycle Model," unpublished paper, Harvard Business School, September.
Subsequent analyses, albeit ones that follow similar approaches, also suggest that there are net benefits to higher capital standards.
One example is the analysis by Firestone, Lorenc, and Ranish, "An Empirical Economic Assessment," in note 17.
Another is Ingo Fender and Ulf Lewrick (2016), "Adding It All Up: The Macroeconomic Impact of Basel III and Outstanding Reform Issues (PDF)," BIS Working Papers 591 (Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, November).
Indeed, this research points to benefits from capital requirements in excess of those adopted, a conclusion also reached in Wayne Passmore and Alexander H.
von Hafften (2017), "Are Basel's Capital Surcharges for Global Systemically Important Banks Too Small? (PDF)" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-021 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February).
This conclusion is consistent with, for example, the findings in Federal Reserve Banks (2017), 2016 Small Business Credit Survey: Report on Employer Firms (PDF) (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, April).
As I have discussed previously, the Federal Reserve has been considering improvements through a number of work streams.
For example, the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies have recently completed the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (EGRPRA) review.
Under EGRPRA, the federal banking agencies are required to conduct a joint review of their regulations every 10 years to identify provisions that are outdated, unnecessary, or unduly burdensome.
The Federal Reserve viewed this review as a timely opportunity to step back and identify ways to reduce regulatory burden, particularly for smaller or less complex banks that pose less risk to the U.S.
Yellen (2016), "Supervision and Regulation," statement before the Committee on Financial Services, U.S.
For the final EGRPRA report to the Congress, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and National Credit Union Administration (2017), Joint Report to Congress: Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act (PDF) (Washington: Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, March).

My tenure at the International Monetary Fund overlapped with the first two and a half years of Arminio's time as president of the Central Bank of Brazil, and in our capacities at the time, we had frequent opportunities to interact and converse.
Of course, I watched with admiration the remarkable management of the economy by the Malan-Fraga team in the run-up to the election that brought Lula to power.
In particular, Arminio and his Central Bank team's management of the exchange rate--which at one point reached 3.95 reais per dollar--was masterly and put in place a sound foundation for that essential part of Brazil's economic machinery in the years that followed.
Subsequently, as I was on the brink of transitioning to the world of central banking early in 2005--that is, prior to taking up my position as governor of the Bank of Israel--Arminio was able to turn the tables and offered me some hard-edged advice on how to be a central banker.
Beware of a tendency to be overly conservative once you start wearing the central bank hat"; and "Number 6.
Now I will turn to the main topic of my discussion, the low level of global real interest rates, an important and distinguishing feature of the current global economic environment.
In the United States, the yield on 10-year Treasury bonds is near all-time lows, with the same being true in the euro area, the United Kingdom, and Japan (figure 1).
Yields have also declined in many emerging markets, with interest rates falling almost 400 basis points in Korea since the financial crisis and by a similar amount in Israel.
As shown in figure 2, the decline has been less apparent in Brazil and South Africa, though interest rates in both countries remain well below previous peaks.
In this talk, I will address two questions: Why are interest rates so low? And why has the decline in interest rates been so widespread?1
Lower inflation explains a portion of the decline in nominal interest rates.
Longer-term interest rates reflect market participants' expectations of future inflation as well as the expected path of real, or inflation-adjusted, interest rates.
And while lower realized inflation and credible central back inflation targets have likely stabilized expected inflation at relatively low levels compared with much of the 20th century, inflation-adjusted yields have also notably decreased.
The decline in interest rates also does not appear to be primarily an outcome of the economic cycle.
Longer-term interest rates in the United States have remained low even as the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has increased the short-term federal funds rate by 100 basis points and as the unemployment rate has declined below the median of FOMC participants' assessments of its longer-run normal level.
Rather, it appears as though much of the decline has occurred in the equilibrium level of the real interest rate--also known as the natural rate of interest or, alternatively, r*.
Knut Wicksell, in his 1898 treatise Interest and Prices, wrote, "There is a certain level of the average rate of interest which is such that the general level of prices has no tendency to move either upwards or downwards."2 In recent years, the coincidence of low inflation and low interest rates suggests that the natural rate of interest is likely very low today.
Wicksell was clearly referring to the natural rate as the real interest rate when the economy is at full employment.
The widely cited methodology of my Federal Reserve colleagues Thomas Laubach and John Williams, attempts to gauge the natural rate in the longer run after various shorter-term influences, including the business cycle, have played out.
In a recent update of their analysis, they find that the natural rate of interest has declined about 150 basis points in the United States since the financial crisis and is currently about 50 basis points.
In an extension of this analysis, shown in figure 3, Laubach, Williams, and Kathryn Holston, also a Federal Reserve colleague, show that the decline in the natural rate of interest is a common feature across a number of foreign economies.4 The fall in equilibrium interest rates was most pronounced at the time of the financial crisis, but rates have shown little tendency to increase during the long recovery from the crisis.
How Should We Think about the Decline in Equilibrium Interest Rates? An Investment and Savings Framework
There are many factors that could be holding down interest rates, some of which could fade over time, including the effects of quantitative easing in the United States and abroad and a heightened demand for safe assets affecting yields on advanced-economy government securities.
I will focus on some of the more enduring factors that could potentially lower the equilibrium interest for some time.
In attempting to explain why real interest rates have fallen, a useful starting point is to think of the natural interest rate as the price that equilibrates the economy's supply of saving with the demand for investment in the long run, when the economy is at full employment.
With this framework in mind, low interest rates reflect factors that increase saving, depress investment demand, or both.
Focusing initially on the United States, I will look at three interrelated factors that are likely contributing to low interest rates: slower trend economic growth, an aging population and demographic developments, and relatively weak investment.
I will then discuss global developments and spillovers between countries.
But first I would like to interject a quick word on why we as policymakers might be concerned about low interest rates.
First, as John Maynard Keynes discussed in the concluding chapters of The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money, a low equilibrium interest rate increases the risks of falling into a liquidity trap, a situation where the nominal interest rate is stuck, by an effective lower bound, above the rate necessary to bring the economy back to potential.5 Relatedly, but more broadly, low equilibrium interest rates are a key pillar of the secular stagnation hypothesis, which Larry Summers has carried forward during the past few years.6 Second, a low natural rate could potentially hurt financial stability if it leads investors to reach for yield or hurts financial firms' profitability.
And, third--and perhaps most troubling--a low equilibrium rate sends a powerful signal that the growth potential of the economy may be limited.7
One factor contributing to low equilibrium interest rates in the United States has been a slowdown in the pace of potential, or trend, growth.
According to the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), real potential growth in the United States is currently around 1.5 percent, compared with a pace about double that, on average, in the two decades leading up to the financial crisis.
A prime culprit in the growth slowdown has been the slow rate of labor productivity growth, which has increased only 1/2 percent, on average, over the past five years, compared with a 2 percent growth rate over the period from 1976 to 2005.8 A declining rate of labor force growth has also worked to push down trend growth.
The CBO is projecting that the potential labor force in the United States will grow at about 1/2 percent per year over the next decade, less than half the pace observed, on average, in the two decades before the financial crisis.
Likewise, slower growth diminishes the number of business opportunities that can be profitably undertaken, weighing on investment demand.
The aging of the population can work to lower the equilibrium interest rate beyond its effect on the size of the labor force and trend growth.
As households near retirement, they tend to save more, anticipating having to run down their savings after they leave the labor force.
Federal Reserve economists, in one study, estimate that higher saving by near-retirement households could be pushing down the longer-run equilibrium federal funds rate relative to its level in the 1980s by as much as 75 basis points.9
Another factor weighing on equilibrium real interest rates has been the recent weakness of investment.
What explains the tepid response of capital spending to historically low interest rates? As mentioned earlier, low productivity growth has certainly been a contributing factor, as firms see fewer profitable investment opportunities.
For one, uncertainty about the outlook for government policy in health care, regulation, taxes, and trade can cause firms to delay projects until the policy environment clarifies.
Firms also seem quite uncertain about the disruptive capacity of new technologies.
Relatedly, it is possible that as the economy evolves in response to new technologies, production is becoming less capital intensive than it was in earlier decades.10
Another possible explanation for the weakness of investment in the United States has been a decrease in competition within industries, as evidenced by decreasing firm entry and exit rates as well as increased industry concentration.11 Less competition allows firms to maintain high profits while lowering the pressure on them to increase production to maintain market share.
In an earlier discussion, I attempted to quantify the effect that these factors--slow growth, demographics, and investment--might be having on the long-run equilibrium rate in the United States.12 According to simulations from the Board's FRB/US model, the slowdown in growth appears likely to be the primary factor depressing the long-run equilibrium rate, although the contributions from demographics and weak investment demand were also sizable.
Global Links: Why Has the Decline in Interest Rates Been So Widespread?
Up until now, I have looked primarily at factors within the United States.
However, as I have pointed out earlier, the decline in interest rates is a global phenomenon.
Why has the decline in interest rates been so widespread?
One important reason is that many of the same factors that have been driving down the equilibrium interest rate in the United States have operated with equal or even greater force in many foreign economies.
The slowdown in labor productivity growth has been widespread across many countries.
Likewise, the advanced economies and some emerging markets have experienced demographic shifts that are in some cases much more pronounced than in the United States, with the working-age population in some countries even declining over the past decade.
Another explanation is that we live in an integrated global economy where economic developments in one country spill over into other countries via trade and capital flows as well as prices, including interest rates and exchange rates.13 In the most general sense, these spillovers are captured in the pattern of current balances, shown in figure 4.
If we abstract from a somewhat sizable statistical discrepancy, the sum of global current accounts should be equal to zero, as, in the aggregate, one country's deficit must be matched by a surplus in some configuration of other countries--but it is not always apparent who is spilling over onto whom.
Prior to the financial crisis, it was widely speculated that foreign developments were depressing U.S.
Former Chairman Bernanke characterized the foreign forces acting on U.S.
interest rates as the "global saving glut," with particular reference to emerging market economies that were running persistent current account surpluses, sometimes as a result of specific policy decisions regarding exchange rates, reserve accumulation, and fiscal policy.14 The global saving glut was also a factor in the "Greenspan conundrum," or the observation that a series of Federal Reserve rate hikes over the period from 2004 to 2006 seemed to have little effect on longer-term interest rates in the United States.
As shown in figure 5, the deterioration of the U.S.
current account deficit from 2001 to 2006, coincident with falling interest rates both in the United States and globally, supports the notion that higher foreign saving relative to foreign investment was likely holding down U.S.
What can the distribution of global current accounts tell us about international spillovers in the post-crisis era? As shown in figure 6, the most notable development has been the almost exact reversal of the expansion of the U.S.
current account deficit observed during the time of the global saving glut.
Has the global saving glut of the mid-2000s faded away? Falling interest rates over the period that the U.S.
deficit narrowed suggest not.15 If a shrinking supply of foreign saving, the reversal of the global saving glut, was behind the narrowing of the U.S.
deficit, then the tendency would have been for equilibrium real interest rates to have increased.16 Rather, falling equilibrium rates suggest that falling U.S.
demand for foreign savings has precipitated the narrowing of the U.S.
current account deficit post-crisis suggest that the United States has been the primary source of downward pressure on global interest rates over the past decade? Certainly, if the United States had maintained its previous deficit, interest rates would likely be higher around the world.
capacity to absorb global savings at the pace observed prior to the crisis was unsustainable.17 Rather, an alternative explanation would be that the sharp decline in global interest rates post-crisis reflects factors that were likely well in train before the financial crisis.
The downward trend in interest rates would have been more pronounced earlier in the decade had not elevated, and ultimately unsustainable, borrowing in the United States slowed the decline in interest rates in the years immediately preceding the crisis.
This narrative is consistent with empirical evidence that suggests that the slowdowns in global productivity growth and labor force growth, both key factors in the slowing pace of global growth and the downward pressure on interest rates, predate the global financial crisis.18
It is notable in figure 6 that the euro area has also seen a sizable increase in its current account position post-crisis, suggesting that developments in Europe have also played a role in pushing down interest rates.
The increase in the euro-area current account in part reflects sharp reversals in the current account deficits of Greece, Portugal, Spain, and Ireland--all countries that had witnessed large increases in their deficits during the global saving glut period prior to the crisis, in a pattern similar to that experienced by the United States.
What, If Anything, Can Be Done about Low Interest Rates?
Given the potential risks around low interest rates I discussed earlier, including the impact on the effectiveness of monetary policy and financial stability concerns, what should policymakers do to address the problem?
Transparent and sound monetary policy can boost confidence in the stability of the growth outlook, an outcome that can in turn alleviate precautionary demand for savings and encourage investment, pushing up the equilibrium interest rate.
However, as I have said before--and Ben Bernanke before me--"Monetary policy is not a panacea."19 Also, to repeat myself, policies to boost productivity growth and the longer-run potential of the economy are more likely to be found in effective fiscal and regulatory measures than in central bank actions.
This statement is true not only in the United States, but also around the globe.
But it is not to say that monetary policy is irrelevant to the growth rate of the economy.
Monetary Policy and International Implications," speech delivered at "Challenges of the Global Financial System: Risks and Governance under Evolving Globalization," a High-Level Seminar sponsored by the Bank of Japan-International Monetary Fund, Tokyo, October 14.
"Why Are Interest Rates So Low, Part 3: The Global Savings Glut," Ben Bernanke's Blog, April 1.
"The Global Factor in Neutral Policy Rates: Some Implications for Exchange Rates, Monetary Policy, and Policy Coordination," NBER Working Paper Series 23562.
"Is There an Investment Gap in Advanced Economies? If So, Why? (PDF)" paper presented at the Fourth Annual ECB Forum on Central Banking, Sintra, Portugal, June 27.
"Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession," in Jonathan A.
"Low Interest Rates," speech delivered at the 40th Annual Central Banking Seminar, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, October 5.
"Why Are Interest Rates So Low? Causes and Implications," speech delivered at the Economic Club of New York, New York, October 17.
"Understanding the New Normal: The Role of Demographics (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2016-080.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: International Trends and Determinants," in Richard Clarida and Lucrezia Reichlin, organizers, NBER International Seminar on Macroeconomics 2016.
"The Expected Real Interest Rate in the Long Run: Time Series Evidence with the Effective Lower Bound," FEDS Notes.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February 9.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.
"Measuring the Natural Rate of Interest: Alternative Specifications (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2017-059.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June.
Economic Prospects: Secular Stagnation, Hysteresis, and the Zero Lower Bound," Business Economics, vol.
"The Age of Secular Stagnation: What It Is and What to Do about It," Foreign Affairs, vol.
Interest and Prices (Geldzins und Güterpreise): A Study of the Causes Regulating the Value of Money, trans.
Views expressed in this presentation are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Wicksell's Interest and Prices, published in German in 1898 as Geldzins und Güterpreise by Gustav Fischer (Jena), was first published in English in 1936--see Wicksell (1936).
It is important to point out that r* is not an observable variable and that estimates generally reflect assumptions about how the economy works and should be modeled.
As such, different methodologies or underlying economic models can come up with a wide range of estimates of r*.
Lewis and Vazquez-Grande (2017) examine parameter uncertainty and alternative specifications in the estimation of the natural rate of interest.
See Fischer (2016a) for a fuller discussion of the risks associated with a low equilibrium interest rate.
See Irwin (2017) for an examination of an alternative pattern of causality, where slow growth--and, in particular, weak wage growth--has led to low productivity growth rather than vice versa.
I should also remind the reader of Herbert Stein's observation that the difference between a growth rate of 1 percent and a growth rate of 2 percent is 100 percent.
See Clarida (2017) for a model-based discussion of global factors and neutral interest rates.
While it is unsurprising that interest rates fell sharply during the recession that followed the financial crisis, it is less apparent that equilibrium rates should have fallen so sharply or remain so low almost a decade later following the cyclical recovery in the United States and many other countries.
See Bernanke (2015) for a discussion of the persistence of the global saving glut.
This is not to suggest that the global saving glut was the only factor leading to the financial crisis.


At the Conference for the 2017 Summer Training and Scholarship Program sponsored by the American Economic Association and the National Science Foundation and hosted by the Department of Economics, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan
Let me begin by expressing my appreciation to the American Economic Association (AEA), the National Science Foundation and the other organizations and institutions sponsoring this conference, which for nearly 20 years has focused attention on the benefits of diversity and the need for continued progress in ensuring that the best and the brightest have the opportunity to advance and contribute to the field of economics.
Perhaps more than any other profession, it is in the DNA of economists to believe that equality of opportunity is important not only as a matter of fairness, but also to our country's vitality.
Diversity in the economics profession will bring important insights into the analysis of our economy and financial system and help policymakers make better decisions in promoting a healthier economy.
So given that diversity in the economics profession is an important goal, how have we been doing? Unfortunately, by any measure, we are still falling short.
I've laid out a number of arguments why policy and society at large would be better off if there were more women and minorities in the economics profession.
But a more important question for the students here today might reasonably be, what's in it for me? One answer is that there are a ton of interesting questions out there for you to solve.
Given the benefits I have described to the profession and society from increasing diversity in the ranks of economists, as well as the opportunity a degree in economics affords to individuals who pursue the field, it makes sense to look closely, as the AEA and others continue to do, at the reasons more women and minorities do not concentrate in economics in college or depart from economics as they move toward graduation.
The AEA and other groups are rightly focused on what universities and other institutions can do to promote diversity in economics.
Let me now direct my attention to diversity at my institution, the Federal Reserve, because it is both one of the largest employers of PhD economists in the country and a prominent public institution.
The Board of Governors is making considerable effort to recruit and retain economists who are women and minorities.
Every year the Board hires 50 to 60 research assistants (RAs) for two-year terms; the 12 Reserve Banks together hire roughly an equal number.
These are sought-after positions because our RAs have the opportunity to work with the Board's leading economists on both research and work that directly supports policymaking.
Serving as an RA either at the Federal Reserve Board or at one of the Reserve Banks has proven to be a good way to learn more about the profession and prepare for graduate school.
I can report that five graduates of last year's program are now working at the Board as RAs and several are working at Reserve Banks.
For the Federal Reserve System, our recruitment of RAs is a great opportunity to give a wide range of potential newcomers some exposure to what the career pathway of economics looks like.
While not all RAs go on to further economics education and training, a considerable share do, and thus our diversity efforts have the potential to significantly affect career pathways later on.
Indeed, at the highest levels of that process, the Federal Reserve under Chair Janet Yellen and with the strong support of the Governors and Reserve Bank Presidents is committed to increasing diversity among the top-ranking staff at the Board and among leaders of the Reserve Banks.
When I served at the Treasury Department for President Obama, one of my responsibilities was to represent the United States in the Group of 20 (G-20) deputy ministers of finance and central bank officials.
At the time, there had been only one woman among the G-20 countries serving as head of a central bank, in South Africa, and none among the G-7 advanced economies.
Since then, two other women have led G-20 central banks, and now I have the honor of serving with the first woman to lead the Federal Reserve, Janet Yellen.
Earlier this year, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta hired Raphael Bostic as its president and chief executive officer, the first African-American to lead a Reserve Bank.
I look forward to the day when we have moved far beyond all the firsts, when we can see with satisfaction that the people of the Federal Reserve fully reflect the characteristics of the American people.
But if economics seems like a great fit, then choose it with the confidence that you have the capacity to make an important contribution that will be valued.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Amanda Bayer and Cecilia Elena Rouse, (2016) "Diversity in the Economics Profession: A New Attack on an Old Problem," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.

At the National Bureau of Economic Research’s Monetary Economics Summer Institute, Cambridge, Massachusetts
When the central banks in many advanced economies embarked on unconventional monetary policy, it raised concerns that there might be differences in the cross-border transmission of unconventional relative to conventional monetary policy.1 These concerns were sufficient to warrant a special Group of Seven (G-7) statement in 2013 establishing ground rules to address possible exchange rate effects of the changing composition of monetary policy.2
In the United States, in my assessment, normalization of the federal funds rate is now well under way, and the Federal Reserve is advancing plans to allow the balance sheet to run off at a gradual and predictable pace.
And for the first time in many years, the global economy is experiencing synchronous growth, and authorities in the euro area and the United Kingdom are beginning to discuss the time when the need for monetary accommodation will diminish.
Unlike in previous tightening cycles, many central banks currently have two tools for removing accommodation.
They can therefore pursue alternative normalization strategies--first seeking to guide policy rates higher before initiating balance sheet runoff, as in the United States, or instead starting to shrink the balance sheet before initiating a tightening of short-term rates, or undertaking both in tandem.
Shrinking the balance sheet and raising the policy rate can both contribute to achieving the domestic goals of monetary policy, but it is an open question whether alternative normalization approaches might have materially different implications for the composition of demand and for cross-border spillovers, including through exchange rates and other financial channels.
Before discussing the cross-border effects of normalization, it is worth noting that the two tools for removing accommodation--raising policy rates and reducing central bank balance sheets--appear to affect domestic output and inflation in a qualitatively similar way.
This means that central banks can substitute between raising the policy rate and shrinking the balance sheet to remove accommodation, just as both were used to support the recovery following the Great Recession.
Insofar as a range of approaches is likely to be consistent with achieving a central bank's domestic objectives, the choice of normalization strategy may be influenced by other considerations, including the ease of implementing and communicating policy changes, or the desire to minimize possible credit market distortions associated with the balance sheet.
In the case of the Federal Reserve, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided to delay balance sheet normalization until the federal funds rate had reached a high enough level to enable it to be cut materially if economic conditions deteriorate, thus guarding against the risk of returning to the effective lower bound (ELB) in an environment with a historically low neutral interest rate.3 The greater familiarity and past experience with the federal funds rate also weighed in favor of this instrument initially.
Separately, for those central banks that, unlike the Federal Reserve, moved to negative interest rates, there may be special considerations associated with raising policy rates back into positive territory.
One question that naturally arises is whether the major central banks' normalization plans may have material implications for cross-border spillovers--an important issue that until very recently had received scant attention.
This question is a natural extension of the literature examining the cross-border spillovers of the unconventional policy actions taken by the major central banks to provide accommodation.
Although this literature suggests there are good reasons to expect broadly similar cross-border spillovers from tightening through policy rates as through balance sheet runoff, the effects may not be exactly equivalent.
The balance sheet might affect certain aspects of the economy and financial markets differently than the short-term rate due to the fact that the balance sheet more directly affects term premiums on longer-term securities, while the short-term rate more directly affects money market rates.
As a result, similar to the domestic effects, while the international spillovers of conventional and unconventional monetary policy may operate broadly similarly, the relative magnitude of the different channels may be sufficiently different that, on net, the two policy strategies have distinct effects.
Moreover, as was evident with the European Central Bank's (ECB) asset purchases in late 2014 and early 2015, and as we have seen again in reverse in recent weeks, in addition to the standard demand and exchange rate channels, expected or actual asset purchases may have spillovers to foreign financial conditions--by lowering term premiums and the associated longer-term foreign bond yields--that are greater than conventional monetary policy.
To explore possible differences, it is useful to compare two different approaches to policy normalization, each of which is designed to have identical effects on aggregate domestic activity and thus, at least in the long run, on inflation.
At one extreme, a central bank could opt to tighten primarily through conventional policy hikes, while maintaining the balance sheet by reinvesting the proceeds of maturing assets.
At the other extreme, a central bank could rely primarily on reducing the balance sheet, while keeping policy rates unchanged in the near term.
The question is whether there are circumstances in which the choice of normalization strategies, which are similarly effective in achieving domestic mandates, might matter for the global economy.
Where the two approaches have entirely equivalent effects, the central bank could freely substitute between them without changing the composition of home demand, and net exports, the exchange rate, and foreign output would also be unaffected.
Conversely, under different assumptions about the transmission channels of monetary policy, alternative approaches to normalization can have quite different implications for foreign economies.
Most prominently, the exchange rate may be more sensitive to the path of short term rates than to balance sheet adjustments, as some research suggests.4 Although several papers using an event study approach find on balance little disparity in the exchange rate sensitivity to short-term compared to long-term interest rates, this lack of empirical consensus may simply reflect the difficulty of disentangling changes in short-term and longer-term interest rates, which are highly correlated.5
Indeed, the greater sensitivity of exchange rates to expected short-term interest rates than to term premiums was a key rationale behind the Operation Twist strategy in the early 1960s.6 Under Operation Twist, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury made large-scale purchases of longer-term Treasury securities to drive down yields and stimulate the economy, which was suffering from an unemployment rate of nearly 7 percent.
This policy was combined with a modest increase in short-term interest rates intended to alleviate the capital outflow pressures that threatened the sustainability of the Bretton Woods global monetary system.
Ultimately, this policy mix did succeed in reducing long-term interest rates, and also contributed to a reduction in private capital outflows that relieved pressure on U.S.
Let's turn to a simulation of a highly stylized model to explore how a greater sensitivity of the exchange rate to conventional policy relative to balance sheet actions can make a difference in terms of cross-border transmission.
In particular, let's assume a 100-basis-point rise in long-term yields coming from the conventional channel of higher policy rates has double the effect on the exchange rate as a 100 basis point rise in yields coming from higher term premiums.7 If a large country, which is already at potential, experiences a favorable domestic demand shock, it would need to tighten monetary policy to return output to potential.
If the central bank chooses to use the short-term interest rate as its active policy tool, and keeps its balance sheet on hold, the current and expected path of short-term interest rates rises, putting upward pressure on long-term bond yields and causing the real exchange rate to appreciate.
Turning to the effects abroad, the decline in domestic real net exports corresponds to an increase in foreign net exports, which will tend to boost foreign GDP, other things being equal.
How this affects a particular foreign economy will depend on its circumstances and the corresponding policy response of the foreign central bank.
In the case where the foreign economy is pinned at the effective lower bound, the increase in net exports will provide a welcome boost to aggregate demand.
By contrast, if foreign output is already near potential, the foreign central bank will need to respond by tightening policy in order to keep its economy in balance.
If the same amount of policy tightening in the country experiencing a positive demand shock is achieved exclusively through a reduction in the balance sheet, while keeping the policy rate unchanged, the exchange rate would appreciate to a smaller degree, reflecting the lower assumed sensitivity of the exchange rate to the term premium than to policy rates.
Net exports would decline by less--reflecting both the smaller exchange rate appreciation and the smaller rise in domestic demand--and similarly this would result in smaller cross-border spillovers to foreign GDP.
Thus, for a foreign economy that is at the effective lower bound, tightening in the home country through balance-sheet policy will be less welcome than through short-term rates.
The foreign economy will experience less exchange rate depreciation, and so less of a boost to net exports.
In addition, the stimulus to the foreign economy could be further diluted to the extent that the balance sheet policy boosted term premiums on its long-term bonds and hence tightened financial conditions, although this effect has not been built into the simulation model.
By contrast, for a foreign economy that is close to potential, adjustment through the balance sheet in the home country will mean less of a need for the foreign central bank to respond by tightening policy than under home country adjustment through conventional policy.
So far, we have considered the case of central banks with freely floating exchange rates and well-anchored inflation expectations.
What about central banks with managed exchange rates or weakly anchored inflation expectations? To keep the analysis simple, let's assume a foreign central bank aims to completely stabilize its exchange rate vis-à-vis a core country.
Let's again consider circumstances in which the core country experiences a positive demand shock that calls for policy tightening.
Although the pegging economy is likely to experience spillovers under either approach to normalization in the core country, the spillovers are likely to be greater when the core country tightens through the policy rate.
The tightening in the core country will compel the country that is fixing its exchange rate to tighten policy in sync and the core country's currency will rise more against its trading partners with conventional tightening, leading to greater effective appreciation of the pegging country's currency as well.
Although the pegging economy will benefit somewhat from the stronger demand of the core country, that benefit is likely to be outweighed by the adverse effects of a tightening of domestic monetary policy when domestic conditions would not otherwise call for it.
Such considerations may have played a role in the market dynamics experienced by China as discussions about initiating rate hikes progressed in the United States in the second half of 2015 and early 2016.8
Next let's explore alternative approaches to policy normalization by countries facing a similar need to tighten.
Under these assumptions, if both economies were to choose the same normalization strategy--putting primary reliance on either the balance sheet or short-term interest rates--the implications for the exchange rate and net exports are the same: In both cases, the exchange rate between the two countries does not change, and neither do net exports between the countries.
Each central bank would adjust interest rates by the same amount--enough to offset the stimulus from the demand shock--and with interest differentials unchanged, there would be no pressure on the exchange rate between them to move.9 Of course, if there are other economies in the rest of the world that do not experience the same shock, the choice of normalization strategy does matter, similar to the analysis of spillovers from the single core country, presumably magnified by the larger combined global weight of the two economies.
Now let's turn to the case in which the two central banks choose to rely on different policy tools.10 In this case, one country responds to the positive shock by hiking its policy rate to reduce output to its initial level, while the second country responds by shrinking its balance sheet.
The country that relies on the policy rate to make the adjustment experiences an appreciation in the exchange rate, a deterioration in net exports and some expansion of domestic demand, while the country that chooses to rely solely on the balance sheet for tightening experiences a depreciation of its exchange rate and an increase in net exports.
Thus, while both countries achieve their domestic stabilization objectives, whether the requisite policy tightening occurs through increases in policy rates or reductions in the balance sheet matters for the composition of demand, the external balance, and the exchange rate.
I highlighted at the outset the commitment adopted by many leading nations to set monetary policy to achieve domestic objectives such that the exchange rate would not be a primary consideration in the setting of monetary policy.
In the case that balance-sheet and conventional monetary policies have equivalent effects on both domestic spending and the exchange rate, this common principle is straightforward.
But if the cross-border spillovers of reductions in the balance sheet and increases in the policy rate are not equivalent, the sequencing of policy rate and balance sheet normalization could have important implications for the exchange rate and external balance.
Finally, in circumstances where a major central bank is continuing to expand its balance sheet or maintaining a large balance sheet over a sustained period, this policy would likely exert downward pressure on term premiums around the globe, especially in those foreign economies whose bonds were perceived as close substitutes.
Indeed, until very recently, it had been notable how little long yields moved up in the United States even as discussions of balance sheet normalization have moved to the forefront.
This likely reflects at least in part the expectation that ongoing asset purchase programs in other advanced economies would continue holding down long-term yields globally.
The tide seems to have turned in recent weeks, as long yields in the U.S.
have increased notably on market perceptions that foreign officials are beginning to deliberate their own normalization strategies.
I have used a simple stylized model to illustrate circumstances in which the choice of normalization strategies adopted by major central banks can potentially be quite consequential.
Let me conclude by returning to the policy choices facing central banks.
The Federal Reserve chose to remove accommodation initially through increases in the federal funds rate.
In light of recent policy moves, I consider normalization of the federal funds rate to be well under way.
If the data continue to confirm a strong labor market and firming economic activity, I believe it would be appropriate relatively soon to commence the gradual and predictable process of allowing the balance sheet to run off.
Once that process begins, I will want to assess the inflation process closely before making a determination on further adjustments to the federal funds rate in light of the recent softness in core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation.
In my view, the neutral level of the federal funds rate is likely to remain close to zero in real terms over the medium term.
I will want to monitor inflation developments carefully, and to move cautiously on further increases in the federal funds rate, so as to help guide inflation back up around our symmetric target.
Meanwhile, in recent days, we have begun to hear acknowledgement from other major central banks that they too are seeing conditions that suggest policy normalization could be on the table before too long, against the backdrop of a brighter global outlook.
As I just discussed, the pace and timing of how central banks around the world proceed with normalization, and the importance of balance sheet policy relative to changes in short term rates in these normalization plans, could have important implications for exchange rates and financial conditions globally.
The model is a stylized open economy model that includes two symmetric countries linked through trade flows.
The model is specified in real terms under the implicit assumption that inflation is constant (so that real and nominal variables move by the same amount).
Moreover, the model abstracts from any financial linkages between the two economies, including the possibility that monetary policy actions in one country could directly affect yields in the other (e.g., through portfolio balance channels), though such effects are clearly important empirically.
Variables in the foreign country are denoted with an asterisk.
where the second equation incorporates the global resource constraint that $$ nx+{nx}^*=0$$.
Home and foreign absorption depend on long-term interest rates according to the following expressions:
Here $$ rc$$ is the component of long-term interest rates that is driven by conventional monetary policy, $$ ru$$ is the component of long-term interest rates that is driven by unconventional monetary policy, and $$ u$$ is an exogenous aggregate demand shock (with autocorrelation given by $$ \rho$$).
These interest rate components are assumed to have identical effects on aggregate demand, with the parameter $$ \sigma$$ determining the sensitivity of aggregate demand to either component (n.b., interest rates are expressed in percentage points deviation from the steady state).
Net exports are assumed to fall if the real exchange rate ($$ e$$) rises/appreciates, and also if domestic demand is higher relative to foreign demand (since this boost imports).
where $$ \eta$$ is the elasticity of net exports with respect to the exchange rate, and $$ \alpha$$ is the elasticity of net exports to the differential between home and foreign absorption.
The real exchange rate is expressed in percent deviation from the steady state.
The exchange rate is determined according to an interest rate parity condition which implies that the exchange rate appreciates when domestic interest rates are higher than foreign interest rates, with elasticities ( $$ \phi_c$$ and $$ \phi_u$$ ) that can differ depending on whether interest rate movements are driven by conventional or unconventional policy:
The model is closed by specifying the behavior of the monetary authority.
We assume that the monetary authority can adjust either the interest rate associated with conventional policy ($$ rc$$), or the interest rate linked to balance sheet actions ($$ ru$$), or both, to affect output (its goal variable).
The system above contains 10 equations in 10 endogenous variables ($$ y$$, $$ y^*$$, $$ d$$, $$ d^*$$, $$ nx$$, $$ e$$, $$ rc$$, $$ {rc}^*$$, $$ ru$$, $$ {ru}^*$$), as well two shocks, $$ u$$ and $$ u^*$$, that can move GDP, its components, exchange rates, and interest rates.
Figures 1 and 2 show the results of simulating the model under alternative assumptions about the shocks and monetary policy reaction.
In each case, the economy starts in steady state with all variables at zero and experiences a demand shock in period 1 that dies out with an autocorrelation $$ \rho$$ of $$ 0.95$$.
The solid lines illustrate the case when Home uses the short-term interest rate as its active policy tool, and keeps its balance sheet on hold, consistent with a desire to delay balance sheet normalization.
The policy reaction is calibrated to be sufficiently aggressive that home GDP always remains at baseline (see column 2 of Table 1).
The higher policy rate path (that is, higher $$ rc$$) causes the long-term interest rate (panel A) to rise, which in turn induces the real exchange rate to appreciate (panel B).
Because foreign monetary policy rates is assumed to remain on hold, foreign GDP (panel F) rises by the improvement in its net exports (that is, by the mirror image of panel D, given that foreign domestic absorption is unchanged).
The dashed lines illustrate the case of a favorable demand shock in the Home country when the central bank opts to tighten exclusively through reducing its balance sheet (again, by enough to keep output at potential--see column 3 of Table 1).
Long-term interest rates (panel A) rise in response, but the exchange rate appreciates less in this case (panel B), reflecting the lower assumed sensitivity of the exchange rate to unconventional monetary policy actions ( $$ \phi_{u}\lt\phi_{c}$$ ).
Net exports decline (panel D) by less--reflecting both the smaller exchange rate appreciation and a smaller rise in absorption (panel C)--which translates into less of a boost to foreign GDP (panel F) than when the home country adjusts through conventional policy.
The home country is assumed to pursue a policy of actively adjusting its policy rate, while the foreign Country is assumed to rely exclusively on normalizing through the balance sheet.
In each case, the central banks of the two countries tighten policy aggressively enough to keep output at potential (see the parameter settings in column 4 of Table 1).
As policy rates rise in the home country (panel A) and the exchange rate is more sensitive to policy rates than to the balance sheet, the home country's exchange rate (panel B) appreciates, while its net exports (panel D) decline.
Although GDP remains at baseline in each country (panels E and F) given our assumption that monetary policy keeps output at potential (which is unchanged), the alternative policy normalization choices clearly have important effects--even under a common shock--on both exchange rates and the composition of demand in each country.
In particular, because exchange rates in the foreign country are less sensitive to balance sheet than to interest rate policy, the foreign central bank must enact a relatively larger interest rate tightening in order to keep its GDP at potential.
"Operation Twist and the Effect of Large-Scale Asset Purchases," FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-13.
San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, April 25.
Unconventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerging Market Economies," Journal of International Money and Finance, vol.
"Unconventional Monetary Policy and Cross-Border Spillovers," speech delivered at "Unconventional Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies," the 16th International Monetary Fund Jacques Polak Research Conference, sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 6.
Brainard, Lael (2015b), "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1.
"Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Dollar: Conventional Signs, Unconventional Magnitudes (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper Series 2015-18, November.
Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, January (revised May 2017).
"International Channels of Transmission of Monetary Policy and the Mundellian Trilemma (PDF)," paper presented at the 15th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 13-14.
"Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper 23311.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
The new commitment stated: "We reaffirm that our fiscal and monetary policies have been and will remain oriented towards meeting our respective domestic objectives using domestic instruments, and that we will not target exchange rates." See Group of Seven (2013), "Statement by G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors," February 12, paragraph 1.
The corresponding Group of Twenty statement included the new commitment: "We will not target our exchange rates for competitive purposes." See Group of Twenty (2013), "Communiqué of Meeting of G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors," February 16, paragraph 5.
See, for example, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 16; and Brainard (2015b).
See Glick and Leduc (2015), Ferrari, Kearns, and Schrimpf (2016), and Swanson (2017); Swanson attempts to identify separately the effects of forward guidance and asset purchases.
The model is calibrated so that either type of policy action keeps the home country's GDP at baseline.
The analysis of Hofmann, Shim, and Shin (2016) suggests that EMEs may be hurt more if their banks or nonfinancial corporations have relatively large dollar liabilities, as the larger dollar appreciation associated with the policy rate tool would precipitate greater EME balance sheet deterioration in this case.
If one country faces a larger aggregate demand shock than the other, then the situation becomes more like the one-country case we examined before, the policy adjustments lead to spillovers of different magnitudes, and the offset will be partial.


At "Normalizing Central Banks' Balance Sheets: What Is the New Normal?" a conference sponsored by Columbia University’s School of International and Public Affairs and the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, New York
When the central banks in many advanced economies embarked on unconventional monetary policy, it raised concerns that there might be differences in the cross-border transmission of unconventional relative to conventional monetary policy.1 These concerns were sufficient to warrant a special Group of Seven (G-7) statement in 2013 establishing ground rules to address possible exchange rate effects of the changing composition of monetary policy.2
In the United States, in my assessment, normalization of the federal funds rate is now well under way, and the Federal Reserve is advancing plans to allow the balance sheet to run off at a gradual and predictable pace.
And for the first time in many years, the global economy is experiencing synchronous growth, and authorities in the euro area and the United Kingdom are beginning to discuss the time when the need for monetary accommodation will diminish.
Unlike in previous tightening cycles, many central banks currently have two tools for removing accommodation.
They can therefore pursue alternative normalization strategies--first seeking to guide policy rates higher before initiating balance sheet runoff, as in the United States, or instead starting to shrink the balance sheet before initiating a tightening of short-term rates, or undertaking both in tandem.
Shrinking the balance sheet and raising the policy rate can both contribute to achieving the domestic goals of monetary policy, but it is an open question whether alternative normalization approaches might have materially different implications for the composition of demand and for cross-border spillovers, including through exchange rates and other financial channels.
Before discussing the cross-border effects of normalization, it is worth noting that the two tools for removing accommodation--raising policy rates and reducing central bank balance sheets--appear to affect domestic output and inflation in a qualitatively similar way.
This means that central banks can substitute between raising the policy rate and shrinking the balance sheet to remove accommodation, just as both were used to support the recovery following the Great Recession.
Insofar as a range of approaches is likely to be consistent with achieving a central bank's domestic objectives, the choice of normalization strategy may be influenced by other considerations, including the ease of implementing and communicating policy changes, or the desire to minimize possible credit market distortions associated with the balance sheet.
In the case of the Federal Reserve, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) decided to delay balance sheet normalization until the federal funds rate had reached a high enough level to enable it to be cut materially if economic conditions deteriorate, thus guarding against the risk of returning to the effective lower bound (ELB) in an environment with a historically low neutral interest rate.3 The greater familiarity and past experience with the federal funds rate also weighed in favor of this instrument initially.
Separately, for those central banks that, unlike the Federal Reserve, moved to negative interest rates, there may be special considerations associated with raising policy rates back into positive territory.
One question that naturally arises is whether the major central banks' normalization plans may have material implications for cross-border spillovers--an important issue that until very recently had received scant attention.
This question is a natural extension of the literature examining the cross-border spillovers of the unconventional policy actions taken by the major central banks to provide accommodation.
Although this literature suggests there are good reasons to expect broadly similar cross-border spillovers from tightening through policy rates as through balance sheet runoff, the effects may not be exactly equivalent.
The balance sheet might affect certain aspects of the economy and financial markets differently than the short-term rate due to the fact that the balance sheet more directly affects term premiums on longer-term securities, while the short-term rate more directly affects money market rates.
As a result, similar to the domestic effects, while the international spillovers of conventional and unconventional monetary policy may operate broadly similarly, the relative magnitude of the different channels may be sufficiently different that, on net, the two policy strategies have distinct effects.
Moreover, as was evident with the European Central Bank's (ECB) asset purchases in late 2014 and early 2015, and as we have seen again in reverse in recent weeks, in addition to the standard demand and exchange rate channels, expected or actual asset purchases may have spillovers to foreign financial conditions--by lowering term premiums and the associated longer-term foreign bond yields--that are greater than conventional monetary policy.
To explore possible differences, it is useful to compare two different approaches to policy normalization, each of which is designed to have identical effects on aggregate domestic activity and thus, at least in the long run, on inflation.
At one extreme, a central bank could opt to tighten primarily through conventional policy hikes, while maintaining the balance sheet by reinvesting the proceeds of maturing assets.
At the other extreme, a central bank could rely primarily on reducing the balance sheet, while keeping policy rates unchanged in the near term.
The question is whether there are circumstances in which the choice of normalization strategies, which are similarly effective in achieving domestic mandates, might matter for the global economy.
Where the two approaches have entirely equivalent effects, the central bank could freely substitute between them without changing the composition of home demand, and net exports, the exchange rate, and foreign output would also be unaffected.
Conversely, under different assumptions about the transmission channels of monetary policy, alternative approaches to normalization can have quite different implications for foreign economies.
Most prominently, the exchange rate may be more sensitive to the path of short term rates than to balance sheet adjustments, as some research suggests.4 Although several papers using an event study approach find on balance little disparity in the exchange rate sensitivity to short-term compared to long-term interest rates, this lack of empirical consensus may simply reflect the difficulty of disentangling changes in short-term and longer-term interest rates, which are highly correlated.5
Indeed, the greater sensitivity of exchange rates to expected short-term interest rates than to term premiums was a key rationale behind the Operation Twist strategy in the early 1960s.6 Under Operation Twist, the Federal Reserve and the Treasury made large-scale purchases of longer-term Treasury securities to drive down yields and stimulate the economy, which was suffering from an unemployment rate of nearly 7 percent.
This policy was combined with a modest increase in short-term interest rates intended to alleviate the capital outflow pressures that threatened the sustainability of the Bretton Woods global monetary system.
Ultimately, this policy mix did succeed in reducing long-term interest rates, and also contributed to a reduction in private capital outflows that relieved pressure on U.S.
Let's turn to a simulation of a highly stylized model to explore how a greater sensitivity of the exchange rate to conventional policy relative to balance sheet actions can make a difference in terms of cross-border transmission.
In particular, let's assume a 100-basis-point rise in long-term yields coming from the conventional channel of higher policy rates has double the effect on the exchange rate as a 100 basis point rise in yields coming from higher term premiums.7 If a large country, which is already at potential, experiences a favorable domestic demand shock, it would need to tighten monetary policy to return output to potential.
If the central bank chooses to use the short-term interest rate as its active policy tool, and keeps its balance sheet on hold, the current and expected path of short-term interest rates rises, putting upward pressure on long-term bond yields and causing the real exchange rate to appreciate.
Turning to the effects abroad, the decline in domestic real net exports corresponds to an increase in foreign net exports, which will tend to boost foreign GDP, other things being equal.
How this affects a particular foreign economy will depend on its circumstances and the corresponding policy response of the foreign central bank.
In the case where the foreign economy is pinned at the effective lower bound, the increase in net exports will provide a welcome boost to aggregate demand.
By contrast, if foreign output is already near potential, the foreign central bank will need to respond by tightening policy in order to keep its economy in balance.
If the same amount of policy tightening in the country experiencing a positive demand shock is achieved exclusively through a reduction in the balance sheet, while keeping the policy rate unchanged, the exchange rate would appreciate to a smaller degree, reflecting the lower assumed sensitivity of the exchange rate to the term premium than to policy rates.
Net exports would decline by less--reflecting both the smaller exchange rate appreciation and the smaller rise in domestic demand--and similarly this would result in smaller cross-border spillovers to foreign GDP.
Thus, for a foreign economy that is at the effective lower bound, tightening in the home country through balance-sheet policy will be less welcome than through short-term rates.
The foreign economy will experience less exchange rate depreciation, and so less of a boost to net exports.
In addition, the stimulus to the foreign economy could be further diluted to the extent that the balance sheet policy boosted term premiums on its long-term bonds and hence tightened financial conditions, although this effect has not been built into the simulation model.
By contrast, for a foreign economy that is close to potential, adjustment through the balance sheet in the home country will mean less of a need for the foreign central bank to respond by tightening policy than under home country adjustment through conventional policy.
So far, we have considered the case of central banks with freely floating exchange rates and well-anchored inflation expectations.
What about central banks with managed exchange rates or weakly anchored inflation expectations? To keep the analysis simple, let's assume a foreign central bank aims to completely stabilize its exchange rate vis-à-vis a core country.
Let's again consider circumstances in which the core country experiences a positive demand shock that calls for policy tightening.
Although the pegging economy is likely to experience spillovers under either approach to normalization in the core country, the spillovers are likely to be greater when the core country tightens through the policy rate.
The tightening in the core country will compel the country that is fixing its exchange rate to tighten policy in sync and the core country's currency will rise more against its trading partners with conventional tightening, leading to greater effective appreciation of the pegging country's currency as well.
Although the pegging economy will benefit somewhat from the stronger demand of the core country, that benefit is likely to be outweighed by the adverse effects of a tightening of domestic monetary policy when domestic conditions would not otherwise call for it.
Such considerations may have played a role in the market dynamics experienced by China as discussions about initiating rate hikes progressed in the United States in the second half of 2015 and early 2016.8
Next let's explore alternative approaches to policy normalization by countries facing a similar need to tighten.
Under these assumptions, if both economies were to choose the same normalization strategy--putting primary reliance on either the balance sheet or short-term interest rates--the implications for the exchange rate and net exports are the same: In both cases, the exchange rate between the two countries does not change, and neither do net exports between the countries.
Each central bank would adjust interest rates by the same amount--enough to offset the stimulus from the demand shock--and with interest differentials unchanged, there would be no pressure on the exchange rate between them to move.9 Of course, if there are other economies in the rest of the world that do not experience the same shock, the choice of normalization strategy does matter, similar to the analysis of spillovers from the single core country, presumably magnified by the larger combined global weight of the two economies.
Now let's turn to the case in which the two central banks choose to rely on different policy tools.10 In this case, one country responds to the positive shock by hiking its policy rate to reduce output to its initial level, while the second country responds by shrinking its balance sheet.
The country that relies on the policy rate to make the adjustment experiences an appreciation in the exchange rate, a deterioration in net exports and some expansion of domestic demand, while the country that chooses to rely solely on the balance sheet for tightening experiences a depreciation of its exchange rate and an increase in net exports.
Thus, while both countries achieve their domestic stabilization objectives, whether the requisite policy tightening occurs through increases in policy rates or reductions in the balance sheet matters for the composition of demand, the external balance, and the exchange rate.
I highlighted at the outset the commitment adopted by many leading nations to set monetary policy to achieve domestic objectives such that the exchange rate would not be a primary consideration in the setting of monetary policy.
In the case that balance-sheet and conventional monetary policies have equivalent effects on both domestic spending and the exchange rate, this common principle is straightforward.
But if the cross-border spillovers of reductions in the balance sheet and increases in the policy rate are not equivalent, the sequencing of policy rate and balance sheet normalization could have important implications for the exchange rate and external balance.
Finally, in circumstances where a major central bank is continuing to expand its balance sheet or maintaining a large balance sheet over a sustained period, this policy would likely exert downward pressure on term premiums around the globe, especially in those foreign economies whose bonds were perceived as close substitutes.
Indeed, until very recently, it had been notable how little long yields moved up in the United States even as discussions of balance sheet normalization have moved to the forefront.
This likely reflects at least in part the expectation that ongoing asset purchase programs in other advanced economies would continue holding down long-term yields globally.
The tide seems to have turned in recent weeks, as long yields in the U.S.
have increased notably on market perceptions that foreign officials are beginning to deliberate their own normalization strategies.
I have used a simple stylized model to illustrate circumstances in which the choice of normalization strategies adopted by major central banks can potentially be quite consequential.
Let me conclude by returning to the policy choices facing central banks.
The Federal Reserve chose to remove accommodation initially through increases in the federal funds rate.
In light of recent policy moves, I consider normalization of the federal funds rate to be well under way.
If the data continue to confirm a strong labor market and firming economic activity, I believe it would be appropriate soon to commence the gradual and predictable process of allowing the balance sheet to run off.
Once that process begins, I will want to assess the inflation process closely before making a determination on further adjustments to the federal funds rate in light of the recent softness in core PCE (personal consumption expenditures) inflation.
In my view, the neutral level of the federal funds rate is likely to remain close to zero in real terms over the medium term.
I will want to monitor inflation developments carefully, and to move cautiously on further increases in the federal funds rate, so as to help guide inflation back up around our symmetric target.
Meanwhile, in recent days, we have begun to hear acknowledgement from other major central banks that they too are seeing conditions that suggest policy normalization could be on the table before too long, against the backdrop of a brighter global outlook.
As I just discussed, the pace and timing of how central banks around the world proceed with normalization, and the importance of balance sheet policy relative to changes in short term rates in these normalization plans, could have important implications for exchange rates and financial conditions globally.
The model is a stylized open economy model that includes two symmetric countries linked through trade flows.
The model is specified in real terms under the implicit assumption that inflation is constant (so that real and nominal variables move by the same amount).
Moreover, the model abstracts from any financial linkages between the two economies, including the possibility that monetary policy actions in one country could directly affect yields in the other (e.g., through portfolio balance channels), though such effects are clearly important empirically.
Variables in the foreign country are denoted with an asterisk.
where the second equation incorporates the global resource constraint that $$ nx+{nx}^*=0$$.
Home and foreign absorption depend on long-term interest rates according to the following expressions:
Here $$ rc$$ is the component of long-term interest rates that is driven by conventional monetary policy, $$ ru$$ is the component of long-term interest rates that is driven by unconventional monetary policy, and $$ u$$ is an exogenous aggregate demand shock (with autocorrelation given by $$ \rho$$).
These interest rate components are assumed to have identical effects on aggregate demand, with the parameter $$ \sigma$$ determining the sensitivity of aggregate demand to either component (n.b., interest rates are expressed in percentage points deviation from the steady state).
Net exports are assumed to fall if the real exchange rate ($$ e$$) rises/appreciates, and also if domestic demand is higher relative to foreign demand (since this boost imports).
where $$ \eta$$ is the elasticity of net exports with respect to the exchange rate, and $$ \alpha$$ is the elasticity of net exports to the differential between home and foreign absorption.
The real exchange rate is expressed in percent deviation from the steady state.
The exchange rate is determined according to an interest rate parity condition which implies that the exchange rate appreciates when domestic interest rates are higher than foreign interest rates, with elasticities ( $$ \phi_c$$ and $$ \phi_u$$ ) that can differ depending on whether interest rate movements are driven by conventional or unconventional policy:
The model is closed by specifying the behavior of the monetary authority.
We assume that the monetary authority can adjust either the interest rate associated with conventional policy ($$ rc$$), or the interest rate linked to balance sheet actions ($$ ru$$), or both, to affect output (its goal variable).
The system above contains 10 equations in 10 endogenous variables ($$ y$$, $$ y^*$$, $$ d$$, $$ d^*$$, $$ nx$$, $$ e$$, $$ rc$$, $$ {rc}^*$$, $$ ru$$, $$ {ru}^*$$), as well two shocks, $$ u$$ and $$ u^*$$, that can move GDP, its components, exchange rates, and interest rates.
Figures 1 and 2 show the results of simulating the model under alternative assumptions about the shocks and monetary policy reaction.
In each case, the economy starts in steady state with all variables at zero and experiences a demand shock in period 1 that dies out with an autocorrelation $$ \rho$$ of $$ 0.95$$.
The solid lines illustrate the case when Home uses the short-term interest rate as its active policy tool, and keeps its balance sheet on hold, consistent with a desire to delay balance sheet normalization.
The policy reaction is calibrated to be sufficiently aggressive that home GDP always remains at baseline (see column 2 of Table 1).
The higher policy rate path (that is, higher $$ rc$$) causes the long-term interest rate (panel A) to rise, which in turn induces the real exchange rate to appreciate (panel B).
Because foreign monetary policy rates is assumed to remain on hold, foreign GDP (panel F) rises by the improvement in its net exports (that is, by the mirror image of panel D, given that foreign domestic absorption is unchanged).
The dashed lines illustrate the case of a favorable demand shock in the Home country when the central bank opts to tighten exclusively through reducing its balance sheet (again, by enough to keep output at potential--see column 3 of Table 1).
Long-term interest rates (panel A) rise in response, but the exchange rate appreciates less in this case (panel B), reflecting the lower assumed sensitivity of the exchange rate to unconventional monetary policy actions ( $$ \phi_{u}\lt\phi_{c}$$ ).
Net exports decline (panel D) by less--reflecting both the smaller exchange rate appreciation and a smaller rise in absorption (panel C)--which translates into less of a boost to foreign GDP (panel F) than when the home country adjusts through conventional policy.
The home country is assumed to pursue a policy of actively adjusting its policy rate, while the foreign Country is assumed to rely exclusively on normalizing through the balance sheet.
In each case, the central banks of the two countries tighten policy aggressively enough to keep output at potential (see the parameter settings in column 4 of Table 1).
As policy rates rise in the home country (panel A) and the exchange rate is more sensitive to policy rates than to the balance sheet, the home country's exchange rate (panel B) appreciates, while its net exports (panel D) decline.
Although GDP remains at baseline in each country (panels E and F) given our assumption that monetary policy keeps output at potential (which is unchanged), the alternative policy normalization choices clearly have important effects--even under a common shock--on both exchange rates and the composition of demand in each country.
In particular, because exchange rates in the foreign country are less sensitive to balance sheet than to interest rate policy, the foreign central bank must enact a relatively larger interest rate tightening in order to keep its GDP at potential.
"Operation Twist and the Effect of Large-Scale Asset Purchases," FRBSF Economic Letter 2011-13.
San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, April 25.
Unconventional Monetary Policy and Transmission to Emerging Market Economies," Journal of International Money and Finance, vol.
"Unconventional Monetary Policy and Cross-Border Spillovers," speech delivered at "Unconventional Monetary and Exchange Rate Policies," the 16th International Monetary Fund Jacques Polak Research Conference, sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 6.
Brainard, Lael (2015b), "Normalizing Monetary Policy When the Neutral Interest Rate is Low," speech delivered at the Stanford Institute for Economic Policy Research, Stanford, Calif., December 1.
"Unconventional Monetary Policy and the Dollar: Conventional Signs, Unconventional Magnitudes (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper Series 2015-18, November.
Basel, Switzerland: Bank for International Settlements, January (revised May 2017).
"International Channels of Transmission of Monetary Policy and the Mundellian Trilemma (PDF)," paper presented at the 15th Jacques Polak Annual Research Conference, sponsored by the International Monetary Fund, Washington, November 13-14.
"Measuring the Effects of Federal Reserve Forward Guidance and Asset Purchases on Financial Markets," NBER Working Paper 23311.
The remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
The new commitment stated: "We reaffirm that our fiscal and monetary policies have been and will remain oriented towards meeting our respective domestic objectives using domestic instruments, and that we will not target exchange rates." See Group of Seven (2013), "Statement by G7 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors," February 12, paragraph 1.
The corresponding Group of Twenty statement included the new commitment: "We will not target our exchange rates for competitive purposes." See Group of Twenty (2013), "Communiqué of Meeting of G20 Finance Ministers and Central Bank Governors," February 16, paragraph 5.
See, for example, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2015), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 16; and Brainard (2015b).
See Glick and Leduc (2015), Ferrari, Kearns, and Schrimpf (2016), and Swanson (2017); Swanson attempts to identify separately the effects of forward guidance and asset purchases.
The model is calibrated so that either type of policy action keeps the home country's GDP at baseline.
The analysis of Hofmann, Shim, and Shin (2016) suggests that EMEs may be hurt more if their banks or nonfinancial corporations have relatively large dollar liabilities, as the larger dollar appreciation associated with the policy rate tool would precipitate greater EME balance sheet deterioration in this case.
If one country faces a larger aggregate demand shock than the other, then the situation becomes more like the one-country case we examined before, the policy adjustments lead to spillovers of different magnitudes, and the offset will be partial.


Labor productivity is the amount of goods and services produced per hour spent on the job.
Increases in labor productivity--again, that's the amount of goods and services produced per hour on the job--are a fundamental factor in determining how fast the economy grows, and how fast the average standard of living grows.
And productivity growth can be influenced by government policy, about which I also want to say a few words.1
Labor productivity growth varies a lot from year to year, but it is possible to discern longer historical periods with high or low productivity growth, as shown in figure 1.
For example, labor productivity rose at an average annual rate of 3-1/4 percent from 1948 to 1973, whereas in the period 1974 to 2016, the average growth rate of productivity was about 1.7 percent.
That is to say that, with the important exception of the information technology (IT) boom beginning in the mid-1990s, the U.S.
economy has been in a low-productivity growth period since 1974.
That is a pleasure, an honor, a joy, and something of a difficulty for anyone wanting to talk about productivity and its growth in the presence of the master.
The reason the rate of productivity growth matters so much is that it is a basic determinant of the rate of growth of average income per capita over long periods.2 To understand that one needs to know only the trick of calculating how long it takes for a growing economy to double.
A good rule of thumb for calculating the time it takes labor productivity (or anything else that is growing) to double can be calculated by dividing 70 by the growth rate.
When labor productivity was growing at 3-1/4 percent per year--during the 25 years from 1948 to 1973--it took 22 years for labor productivity to double.
Looking again at Figure 1, in the 42 years from 1974 to 2016, when labor productivity was growing on average at a rate of 1-3/4 percent, it would have taken approximately 41 years for labor productivity to double.
There is a vast difference between the prospects facing the young in an economy where incomes per capita are doubling every 22 years and an economy in which incomes are on average doubling only every 41 years.
It has certainly changed our lives to some extent, and there is likely some underestimation of productivity growth in the official data.
To a first approximation, one could assume that the rate of bias is constant, and does not account for the estimated decline in productivity growth and that we should not dismiss the slowdown as an artifact of measurement difficulties3 That is the conclusion most researchers reach, but the data issue is not settled.
As Bob Solow famously said, just before the increase in productivity growth of 1996-2003, "the computer is everywhere except in the growth data." And there are serious researchers who have made serious arguments that we will soon be seeing more rapid growth in the productivity data.
Clearly, a key question for economic forecasters, and even more so for U.S.
citizens, and indeed for the entire global economy, is whether we should anticipate a return of the more rapid productivity gains experienced in the IT boom and for the quarter century after the end of World War II, or should instead resign ourselves to tepid economic growth in future years.
And a central policy issue is whether government policies can help push the economy toward a higher-productivity regime.
In this context, it is useful to think of labor productivity growth as coming from three sources, as shown in figure 2.
First, greater investment by firms in tangible equipment and structures, as well as "intangible" investments such as software and product designs, raise labor productivity.
Second, improvements in labor quality, or the capabilities of the workforce, contribute as well--through education, training, and experience.
Finally, innovations yield more or better output from the same inputs--the same capital and labor--such as the introduction of the assembly line and computer-aided product design.
I will consider the role that policy may play through each of these channels.
It is noteworthy that most of the recent drop in productivity is due to a lower contribution from innovation, although weaker investment has played a role as well.
The contribution to labor productivity from labor quality has changed very little.
One possibility is that we are in a productivity lull while firms reorganize to exploit the latest innovations; it took decades before the full benefits of the steam engine, electrification, and computers were seen.6
As shown in figure 3, R&D spending in the United States softened during the Great Recession.
However, government-funded R&D as a share of gross domestic product is at the lowest level in recent history.
To raise productivity and economic well-being, firms must adopt innovations that emerge from R&D as quickly as possible.
This adjustment may occur as start-ups introduce innovation to the market, as existing innovative firms expand, or as competing firms imitate the innovators.
Recent research suggests that all three of these channels, which reflect the economic dynamism of businesses, have been operating sluggishly of late: New firms are not created as often as in the past, innovative firms are not hiring or investing as aggressively as they once did, and the diffusion of innovations is weak from frontier firms to trailing firms.8
It is difficult to pinpoint specific policy actions that would address this decline in dynamism.
Broadly speaking, however, government policymakers should carefully consider the effects of regulations and tax policy on the free flow of workers, capital, and ideas.
In recent years, the contribution to labor productivity growth from investment has declined.
Business fixed investment rose roughly 2-1/2 percent per year, on average, from 2004 to 2016, compared with about 5 percent from 1996 to 2003.9 Some bright spots do exist: Capital expenditure by leading IT companies--Google, Amazon, and the like--has soared since 2010, and investment in the energy sector has returned to life.
This cautious approach to investment may in part reflect uncertainty about the policy environment.
policy uncertainty was elevated for much of the recovery, subsided in 2013, and then rose again late last year, underpinned by uncertainty about policies associated with health care, regulation, taxes, and trade.10 Reasonable people can disagree about the right way forward on each of those issues, but mitigating the damping effect of uncertainty by providing more clarity on the future direction of government policy is highly desirable--particularly if the direction of policy itself is desirable.
Government investment can be an important source of productivity growth as well.
For example, the interstate highway system is credited with boosting productivity in the 1950s and 1960s.11 That highway system and many other federally supported roadways, waterways, and structures have been neglected in recent years.
Also important to raising labor productivity is investment in human capital--workers' knowledge and skills.
Such investment is a particular issue because most forecasts anticipate that the long rise in educational attainment--both for college and high school--may soon come to an end.
One area where policy may play a role is promoting educational access and readiness for groups for whom educational attainment is relatively low.
Recent research has shown a substantial return to public investment in early childhood education for economically disadvantaged groups.
At the other end of the education process, a college degree has long been considered a worthwhile investment, and thus our society should promote access to and readiness for college among a broad range of individuals--in particular through federal support for need-based financial aid.14
Lastly, I will note that ultimately the return on the human capital embodied in our workforce is closely tied to public health.
A rise in morbidity or fall in longevity in the U.S.
Workers too ill to perform at their potential represent lost productivity and welfare for society as a whole.
To conclude, we return to the basic question: How much does productivity growth matter? The basic answer: simple arithmetic says it matters a lot.
If labor productivity grows an average of 2 percent per year, average living standards for our children's generation will be twice what we experienced.
If labor productivity grows an average of 1 percent per year, the difference is dramatic: Living standards will take two generations to double.16
Broadly speaking, government policy works best when it can address a need that the private sector neglects, including investment in basic research, infrastructure, early childhood education, schooling, and public health.
"Has Economic Policy Uncertainty Hampered the Recovery?" in Lee E.
"Beyond Computation: Information Technology, Organizational Transformation, and Business Performance," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
"Does the United States Have a Productivity Slowdown or a Measurement Problem? (PDF)" Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"Mortality and Morbidity in the 21st Century (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, pp.
"The Dynamo and the Computer: An Historical Perspective on the Modern Productivity Paradox," American Economic Review, vol.
"Declining Business Dynamism: What We Know and the Way Forward," American Economic Review, vol.
"Roads to Prosperity? Assessing the Link between Public Capital and Productivity," American Economic Review, vol.
San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, September (revised April, 2014).
"Productivity and Potential Output before, during, and after the Great Recession," NBER Macroeconomics Annual, vol.
"The Disappointing Recovery of Output after 2009 (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring, 1-82.
"The demise of US economic growth: Restatement, rebuttal, and reflections," NBER Working Paper Series 19895.
Historical statistics of the United States, colonial times to 1970.
I am grateful to David Byrne of the Federal Reserve Board for his assistance.
Views expressed in this presentation are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
One needs also to recognize that changes in either the average workweek or the employment to population ratio may damp or augment the effect of labor productivity on GDP per capita.
25) enumerates the inventions of the information age--the personal computer, the Internet, mobile phones, and so on--and notes that for innovation to continue at such a pace, "the achievements of the past 40 years set a hurdle that is dauntingly high." Return to text
83) considers advances in research methods and tools and concludes that "the indirect effects of science on productivity through the tools it provides scientific research may dwarf the direct effects in the long run." Return to text
Brynjolfsson and Hitt (2000) consider the process followed by firms in leveraging innovations in IT equipment and emphasize the role of complementary investment in intangible assets like business reorganization.
Decker and others (2016) highlight the decline in entrepreneurship and worker mobility; Andrews, Criscuolo, and Gal (2015) emphasizes that productivity for firms at the global frontier continues to advance rapidly even as global aggregate productivity growth has slowed.
Pinto and Tevlin (2014) note that in the context of a long-run growth model, a slow pace of investment is not surprising in light of the slow growth in effective labor inputs--which equals the sum of labor quality and total factor productivity growth.
Fernald and others (2017) raise a related point--the ratio of capital to output has returned to its apparent long-run trend.
That said, Byrne, Oliner, and Sichel (2017) argue that the recent rapid declines in the price of IT capital may presage an uptick in investment in response.
As discussed in Baker, Bloom, and Davis (2012), the Economic Policy Uncertainty (EPU) index, available on the EPU website at www.policyuncertainty.com, is constructed from component measures for references to policy uncertainty in major newspapers, the number of tax code provisions set to expire in future years, and disagreement among economic forecasters.
Garcia and others (2017) consider the effect over the full life cycle of an early childhood program targeting disadvantaged families and estimate an internal rate of return of nearly 14 percent.


My topic today is the urgent need for fundamental reform of our system of housing finance--the great unfinished business of post-financial crisis reform.1
The Federal Reserve is not charged with designing or evaluating proposals for housing finance reform.
But we are responsible for regulating and supervising banking institutions to ensure their safety and soundness, and more broadly for the stability of the financial system.
A robust, well-capitalized, well-regulated housing finance system is vital to achieving those goals, and to the long-run health of our economy.
We need a system that provides mortgage credit in good times and bad to a broad range of creditworthy borrowers.
Today, the federal government's role in housing finance is even greater than it was before the crisis.
That leaves us with both potential taxpayer liability and systemic risk.
It is important to learn the right lessons from the failure of the old system.
Above all, we need to move to a system that attracts ample amounts of private capital to stand between housing sector credit risk and taxpayers.
We should also use market forces to increase competition and help to drive innovation.
The global financial crisis ended in 2009, and the economy has just completed its eighth consecutive year of expansion.
The housing market is generally strong, although it is still recovering in some regions.
To preserve these gains, we must ensure the stability of our financial system.
With that goal in mind, we are near completion of a comprehensive program to raise prudential standards for our most systemically important banks.
But fundamental housing finance reform--including reform to address the ultimate status of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, two systemically important government sponsored enterprises (GSEs)--remains on the "to do" list.
Failure to do so would risk repeating the mistakes of the past.
For many years, these institutions prudently pursued their core mission of enhancing the availability of credit for housing.
Beginning in the early 1980s, Fannie and Freddie helped to facilitate the development of the securitization market for home mortgages.
They purchased and bundled mortgage loans, and sold the resulting mortgage-backed securities (MBS) to investors.
Fannie and Freddie also guaranteed payment of principal and interest on the MBS.
With this guarantee in place, MBS investors took the risk of changing interest rates, and the GSEs took the risk of default on the underlying mortgages.
Thanks to the growth in securitization, these two GSEs have dominated U.S.
By promoting standardization, structuring securities to meet a broad range of investor risk appetites, and issuing guaranteed MBS, Fannie and Freddie brought greater liquidity to mortgage markets and made mortgages more affordable.
But the system ultimately failed due to fundamental flaws in its structure.
But the question always loomed in the background: Who would bear the credit risk if a GSE became insolvent and could not perform? Would Congress really allow the GSE to fail to honor its obligations, given the devastating impact that would have on mortgage funding and the housing market? The law stated explicitly that the government did not stand behind the GSEs or their MBS, as Fannie and Freddie frequently pointed out in order to avoid tougher regulation.
Nonetheless, investors understandably came to believe that the two GSEs were too-big-to-fail, and priced in an implicit federal government guarantee behind GSE obligations.
Legislative reforms in the 1990s and the public/private structure led managements to expand the GSEs' balance sheets to enormous size, underpinned by wafer-thin slivers of capital, driving high shareholder returns and very high compensation for management.
In the end, the system privatized the gains and socialized the losses.
But many officials and commentators raised concerns long before the collapse.3 The long-standing internal structural weaknesses of the old system ultimately led to disastrous consequences for homeowners, taxpayers, the financial system, and the economy.
Before considering the path forward, it is important to acknowledge that today's housing sector is healthier and in some respects safer than it was in 2005.
In 2008, Congress enacted the Housing and Economic Recovery Act, which, among other things, created the Federal Housing Finance Agency (FHFA), modeled on and with similar powers to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Under the FHFA's oversight, the two GSEs' retained portfolios have declined to about half of their pre-crisis size, and are expected to continue on a downward path.
The FHFA and the GSEs have also been working to develop a market for the GSEs to lay off their credit risk.
These innovative transactions have raised about $50 billion in private capital that now stands between taxpayers and mortgage credit risk in the GSEs' portfolios.
Moreover, if the lender provides a "qualified mortgage" contract to the borrower, then the lender needs to meet certain other requirements.4 For example, some contract features such as an interest-only period or negative amortization, where the loan balance increases even though the borrower is making payments, are taboo.
Despite the GSEs' significant role in this key market, there is no clarity about their future.
When they were put into conservatorship, Treasury Secretary Paulson noted that "policymakers must view this next period as a 'time out' where we have stabilized the GSEs while we decide their future role and structure."5 Almost nine years into this time out, the federal government's domination of the housing sector has grown and is actually greater than it was before the crisis.
Department of Veterans Affairs have a combined market share of about 80 percent of the purchase mortgage market, with the remaining 20 percent held by private financial institutions.
After reaching nearly 30 percent of the market before the crisis, private-label securitization has dwindled to almost nothing today.
However, under current terms of the contracts that govern their access to Treasury funds, their capital will decline to $0 by January 1, 2018.
Today, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have more than $5 trillion of MBS and corporate debt outstanding, which is widely held and receives various forms of special regulatory treatment.
And because of their scale, these enterprises continue to serve as important standard-setters and significant counterparties to other firms.
While mortgage credit is widely available to most traditional mortgage borrowers, those with lower credit scores face significantly higher standards and lower credit availability than before the crisis.
But it may also be that the current system is too rigid, and that a lack of innovation and product choice has limited mortgage credit availability to some creditworthy households.
According to a survey by the American Banker, in 2016 only nine percent of mortgage originations failed to meet the qualified mortgage contract criteria, down from 16 percent in 2013.7 The same survey reported that almost one-third of U.S.
banks make only qualified mortgage loans, despite the fact that FHA- and GSE-eligible mortgages are exempt from the qualified mortgage requirements until January 2021 or until housing finance reform is enacted, whichever date comes first.
The post-crisis reform program for our largest banks presents an appropriate standard against which the housing finance giants should be judged.
After eight years of reform, our largest banking institutions are now far stronger and safer.
global systemically important banks has more than doubled to $825 billion from about $300 billion before the crisis.
After the crisis revealed significant underlying liquidity vulnerabilities, these institutions now hold $2.3 trillion in high-quality liquid assets, or 25 percent of their total assets.
Under rigorous annual stress tests, they must demonstrate a high level of understanding of their risks and the ability to manage them, and must survive severely adverse economic scenarios with high levels of post-stress capital.
These measures were implemented to reduce the risk that a future crisis will result in taxpayer support, and to help ensure that the financial system could continue to function even in the event that one of these banks were to default.
It is ironic that the housing finance system should escape fundamental reform efforts.
Housing is the single largest asset class in our financial system, with total outstanding residential real estate owned by households of $24 trillion and roughly $10 trillion in single-family mortgage debt.8 While post-crisis regulation has addressed mortgage lending from a consumer protection standpoint, the important risks to taxpayers and the broader economy and financial system have not been robustly addressed.
The most obvious and direct step forward would be to require ample amounts of private capital to support housing finance activities, as we do in the banking system.
We should also strive for a system that can continue to function even in the event of a default of any firm.
Greater amounts of private capital could come through a variety of sources, including through the entry of multiple private guarantors who would insure a portion of the credit risk, through risk-sharing agreements, or through expanded use of credit-risk transfers.
Although private capital must surely be part of the reform effort, there may be limits to the amount of risk that we can credibly expect the private sector to insure.
It is extremely difficult to appropriately price the insurance of catastrophic risk--the risk of a severe, widespread housing crisis.
Furthermore, losses can be correlated across asset classes and geographies in these catastrophic events, rendering risk-diversification strategies ineffective.
Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac have successfully transferred some credit risk to the private sector, but have thus far avoided selling off much of this catastrophic credit risk, arguing that doing so is not economical.9
As I mentioned at the outset, housing finance reform has important implications for the Federal Reserve's oversight of financial institutions, and for the U.S.
These principles are based on the lessons learned from the old system's collapse, and from the experience of post-crisis bank reform.
Housing can be a volatile sector, and housing is often found at the heart of financial crises.10 Our housing finance institutions were not--and are not--structured with that in mind.
Extreme fluctuations in credit availability for housing hurt vulnerable households, reduce affordability and availability, and, as we have seen, can threaten financial stability.
As with banks, the goal should be to ensure that our housing finance system can continue to function even in the face of significant house price declines and severe economic conditions.
Changing the system to attract large amounts of private capital would be a major step toward that goal.
The question of the government's role in the new system is a challenging one for Congress.
Many of the well-known reform proposals include some role for government.
Some argue that government cannot avoid bearing the deep-in-the-tail risk of a catastrophic housing crisis.
A number of proposals incorporate a government guarantee to cover this risk, to take effect after a significant stack of private capital is wiped out.
Reform should not leave us with any institutions that are so important as to be candidates for too-big-to-fail.
Yet there is no way for private firms to acquire a GSE charter and enter the industry.
This is akin to having only two banks with federal deposit insurance, which would make competition by other banks very difficult.
Greater competition also requires a level playing field, allowing secondary market access to a wide-range of lenders and thereby giving homebuyers a choice among many potential mortgage lenders and products.
We know that housing reform is difficult; completely redrawing the system may not be necessary and could complicate the search for a solution.
It would be far more disruptive to implement fundamental structural changes during difficult economic times.
If Congress does not enact reforms over the next few years, we are at risk of settling for the status quo--a government-dominated mortgage market with insufficient private capital to protect taxpayers, and insufficient competition to drive innovation.
There is a serious risk, if not a likelihood, that this state of affairs may persist indefinitely, leaving our housing finance system in a semi-permanent limbo.
Housing finance reform will protect taxpayers from another bailout, be good for households and the economy, and go some distance toward mitigating the systemic risk that the GSEs still pose.
The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
Brunnermeier, "Deciphering the Liquidity and Credit Crunch 2007-2008," The Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol.
(2012) The Subprime Solution: How Today's Global Financial Crisis Happened, and What to Do about It, Princeton, New Jersey: Princeton University Press; E.
Pinto (2015), "Three Studies of Subprime and Alt-A loans in the U.S.
See, for example, Alan Greenspan, "Government-Sponsored Enterprises," remarks delivered at the Conference on Housing, Mortgage Finance, and the Macroeconomy, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta, May 19 2005, www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/speeches/2005/default.htm; and Randal Quarles "Remarks Before the Women in Housing and Finance," June 13, 2006.
on Treasury and Federal Housing Finance Agency Action to Protect Financial Markets and Taxpayers, September 7, 2008, www.treasury.gov/press-center/press-releases/Pages/hp1129.aspx.
FHFA's stress test results published in August 2016 found that under its severely adverse scenario the two GSEs could need to draw up to $125.8 billion from the U.S.
Based on information contained in the Financial Accounts of the United States available at www.federalreserve.gov/econresdata/releases/mortoutstand/current.htm.
See "Overview of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Credit Risk Transfer Transactions," FHFA (August 2015).
The overview notes that " catastrophic risk events are deemed so unlikely, meaning they present so little risk, that the Enterprises have found it to be too costly (not economical) to transfer much of this risk to the private sector," https://www.fhfa.gov/aboutus/reports/reportdocuments/crt-overview-8-21-2015.pdf.
Rogoff, "The Aftermath of Financial Crises," American Economic Review, vol.
20501 (September 2014), www.nber.org/papers/w20501; and the International Monetary Fund, "Housing Finance and Financial Stability – Back to Basics?" Global Financial Stability Report (April 2011), www.imf.org/en/Publications/GFSR/Issues/2016/12/31/~/media/Websites/IMF/imported-flagship-issues/external/pubs/ft/GFSR/2011/01/pdf/_chap3pdf.ashx.

In the years since the start of the global financial crisis, an enormous amount of effort has gone into ensuring that we have a robust financial system that promotes responsible risk taking and an efficient allocation of resources.
But despite these efforts, financial stability cannot be taken for granted, for financial decisions that benefit the people who make them can create systemic risk and harm society as a whole.
For example, excessive leverage and reliance on short-term funding, which may reward risk takers whose bets pay off, may also increase the risk of fire sales and contagion, creating a fragile financial situation.
The disruption in credit intermediation that typically accompanies such episodes can have lasting negative consequences for the real economy and welfare‑‑some of which we are still seeing today.
The Federal Reserve's financial stability responsibilities therefore strongly complement its dual-mandate objectives of achieving price stability and full employment.
Today I will review the monitoring framework we have implemented at the Federal Reserve, before providing an assessment of current U.S.
I will conclude by arguing that while significant progress has been made in recent years toward making the financial system more stable and resilient, we should not ever be complacent.1 We still lack sufficient information to understand some parts of the shadow banking system, and risks sometimes evolve outside the scope of prudential regulation, with potentially negative implications for financial stability.
And sometimes we fail to understand the situation in which we find the financial system and the economy.
One approach is to focus on trends in, and interactions among, financial vulnerabilities across financial institutions, markets, and instruments.
Another approach is to track the resilience of institutions, either broad categories or individual systemically important institutions.
Let me start with the vulnerabilities-focused approach, as developed by Tobias Adrian, Daniel Covitz, and Nellie Liang.2 That approach defines financial vulnerabilities as a collection of factors that may amplify financial shocks and, when elevated, have the potential to generate systemic risk.
The focus is on vulnerabilities rather than shocks, because the timing of shocks, such as sudden drops in asset prices, are inherently hard to predict.
Some financial vulnerabilities are cyclical in nature, rising and falling over time, while others are structural, stemming from longer-term forces shaping the nature of credit intermediation.
Informed by academic research, some of it in-house, we at the Federal Reserve focus on four broad cyclical vulnerabilities: (1) financial-sector leverage, (2) nonfinancial-sector borrowing, (3) liquidity and maturity transformation, and (4) asset valuation pressures.3 Briefly, leverage, across a range of institutions, is a key amplifier of solvency shocks, leading to a greater chance of a credit crunch or fire sale.
Liquidity and maturity mismatches can generate run risk, leading to fire sales and contagion.
Finally, elevated valuation pressures, especially when combined with high leverage, can lead to excessive credit growth.
When asset prices are appreciating rapidly and expected to continue to do so, borrowers and lenders are more willing to accept higher degrees of risk and leverage.
That is, we evaluate where the current levels of these indicators stand compared with their historical values, to identify whether they point to a low, average, or high level of vulnerabilities.
We also closely monitor potential structural vulnerabilities, such as funding models and institutions that provide critical plumbing services to the system.
Because these structural vulnerabilities are less amenable to traditional quantitative monitoring, their identification and assessment follow a less formal process.
As mentioned, complementary to the vulnerabilities-oriented approach is an approach that focuses on institutions.
If the financial system is overleveraged, that vulnerability has to be evident at particular institutions.
An institutions-oriented framework can help us keep track of sector- or institution-specific structural vulnerabilities that may be masked by our overall assessment and provides additional ways to understand how distress at a particular institution or class of institutions may spill over to the wider financial system.
For example, evidence suggests that periods of elevated risk appetite are frequently accompanied by a rise in leverage at financial intermediaries.4 This evidence implies that elevated asset valuation pressures today may be indicative of rising vulnerabilities tomorrow.5
Of course, while a framework provides a disciplined way to evaluate financial stability, we constantly evaluate the framework so that we can identify new risks and vulnerabilities, which may arise as the financial system evolves--for example, in response to market-driven innovation or regulatory reform.
Federal Reserve staff research helps us understand and evaluate the evolving, dynamic financial system.
Before turning to the assessment of the current state of U.S.
The Federal Reserve, unlike many other central banks, does not publish a financial stability report.
The United States already has two congressionally mandated financial stability reports, one authored by the independent Office of Financial Research and a separate report published by the Financial Stability Oversight Council that represents the views of the range of financial regulators, including the Federal Reserve.
Additional views of Federal Reserve officials can be reflected in a range of other venues, including, notably, the Board's semiannual Monetary Policy Report, the Board's annual report, and speeches, such as this one.
That was the framework, now for the current assessment: In the interest of time, my main focus will be on the four cyclical vulnerabilities--leverage, borrowing by households and non-financial firms, liquidity and maturity transformation, and asset valuations--but I will also briefly touch on the most salient structural vulnerabilities.
To summarize the assessment, overall, a range of indicators point to vulnerability that is moderate when compared with past periods: Leverage in the financial sector is at historically low levels, and, following the reforms of money market mutual fund regulations by the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) last fall, vulnerabilities associated with liquidity and maturity transformation appear to have decreased.
However, the increase in prices of risky assets in most asset markets over the past six months points to a notable uptick in risk appetites, although this shift has not yet led to a pickup in the pace of borrowing or a sizable rise in leverage at financial institutions.
To start with, leverage: Regulatory capital at large banks is now at multidecade highs.
The largest banks have already met their fully phased-in capital requirements, including the conservation buffer and the capital surcharge for the global systemically important banks.
Also, the largest banks have been able to meet the post-stress capital requirements in the past couple of stress-test exercises run by the Federal Reserve.
Measures of earnings strength, such as the return on assets, continue to approach pre-crisis levels at most banks, although with interest rates being so low, the return on assets might be expected to have declined relative to their pre-crisis levels--and that fact is also a cause for concern.
Some studies, including one by the International Monetary Fund in this April's Global Financial Stability Report, have recently highlighted this vulnerability, so let me briefly offer my perspective.6 Despite the elevated levels of corporate borrowing, recent developments show signs of improvement.
Leverage has declined slightly since its peak a year ago, and firms with high debt growth appear relatively healthy.
Interest expenses relative to earnings also declined of late and are below their median value since 2001.
Thus, positive shocks to interest rates may adversely affect the ability of some firms to service debt, but this risk may have only limited system-wide effects.
In the household sector, new borrowing is driven mostly by borrowers with higher credit scores, and the amount of debt that borrowers have relative to their incomes is falling, suggesting that the debt is more manageable.
Auto loan balances and delinquency rates are high for borrowers with lower credit scores, meaning that the riskiest borrowers are borrowing more and not paying it back as often.
At first glance, one is tempted to say that the potential for this distress to adversely affect the financial system seems moderate, because both subprime auto loan and student loan borrowers account for a small share of other debt categories.
But, on second thought, one should remember that pre-crisis subprime mortgage loans were dismissed as a stability risk because they accounted for only about 13 percent of household mortgages, and not take excessive confidence.7
Similar to my assessment of leverage, I believe that the primary vulnerability associated with liquidity and maturity transformation--that of a self-fulfilling run--is relatively low.
In recent years, banks have shifted away from more run-prone short-term wholesale sources of funds toward more stable sources such as core deposits.
Large domestic banks have also significantly boosted their holdings of high-quality liquid assets, making them more resilient to funding stress.
In the nonbanking sector, the SEC revised the regulations governing money market mutual funds, first adopted in 2014, with the aim of reducing the key structural vulnerabilities exposed by the massive and destabilizing run on the funds in late 2008.
Those assets include repurchase agreements (or repos) with private banks backed by Treasury securities and the liabilities of government-sponsored enterprises, such as, notably, the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs).
While the current configuration of money markets reveals a reduced financial stability risk compared with the situation prior to the recent reforms, this configuration may not yet represent the final equilibrium.
It will be important to keep an eye on the growth of alternative investment vehicles that perform liquidity transformation in money markets.
Of note, in part supported by increased demand from government-only money funds, the FHLB system has increased its issuance of shorter-maturity liabilities, which are more attractive to money funds.
In turn, this development has led to an increase in the FHLB system's maturity transformation because its assets--loans to banks and insurance companies--have remained relatively long maturity.
As a result, the FHLBs face an increased need to roll over maturing liabilities and thus greater vulnerability should they encounter liquidity pressures.
I should note that the FHLBs' regulator, the Federal Housing Finance Agency (also known as the FA-FA) flagged this issue more than a year ago and is working with the FHLBs (the FLUBS) to address it.
Let me conclude my assessment of current financial stability conditions with a discussion of asset valuation pressures.
Prices of risky assets have increased in most major asset markets in recent months even as risk-free rates also rose.
Prices of commercial real estate (CRE) have grown faster than rents for some time, and measures of the amount of operating income relative to the sale price of commercial properties--the capitalization rate--have reached historical lows, suggesting continued pressures in the CRE market despite some tightening in credit conditions.
The general rise in valuation pressures may be partly explained by a generally brighter economic outlook, but there are signs that risk appetite increased as well.
For example, estimates of equity and bond risk premiums are at the lower end of their historical distributions, and, relative to some non-price-based measures of uncertainty, the implied volatility index VIX is particularly subdued.
So far, the evidently high risk appetite has not lead to increased leverage across the financial system, but close monitoring is warranted.
Let me conclude by offering my view on where we stand in our effort to promote financial stability in the United States.
There is no doubt the soundness and resilience of our financial system has improved since the 2007-09 crisis.
financial system is inherently dynamic, with a range of institutions competing to offer a changing mix of financial products.
As a result, we monitor these vulnerabilities, and we are vigilant with respect to economic and financial developments across markets and institutions within the United States and around the world.
"Making Sense of the Subprime Crisis (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp.
"Getting the Policy Mix Right," in Global Financial Stability Report.
I am grateful to Chiara Scotti and Filip Zikes of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance.
Views expressed in this presentation are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.

I appreciate the opportunity to speak at the Salzburg Global Seminar.
Today I will discuss our current regulatory regime, and areas where we may be able to make adjustments.
We need a resilient, well-capitalized, well-regulated financial system that is strong enough to withstand even severe shocks and support economic growth by lending through the economic cycle.
The Federal Reserve has approached the post-crisis regulatory and supervisory reforms with that outcome in mind.
financial system is stronger today than it was a decade ago.
Loss-absorbing capacity among banks is substantially higher as a result of both regulatory requirements and stress testing exercises.
The banking industry, and the largest banking firms in particular, face far less liquidity risk than before the crisis.
And progress in resolution planning by the largest firms has reduced the threat that their failure would pose.
Evidence overwhelmingly shows that financial crises can cause severe and lasting damage to the economy's productive capacity and growth potential.
Higher capital requirements increase bank costs, and at least some of those costs will be passed along to bank customers and shareholders.
But in the longer term, stronger prudential requirements for large banking firms will produce more sustainable credit availability and economic growth.
Our objective should be to set capital and other prudential requirements for large banking firms at a level that protects financial stability and maximizes long-term, through-the-cycle credit availability and economic growth.
To accomplish that goal, it is essential that we protect the core elements of these reforms for our most systemic firms in capital and liquidity, stress testing and resolution.
With that in mind, I will highlight five key areas of focus for regulatory reform.
We are working to build on the relief we have provided in the areas of call reports and exam cycles, by developing a proposal to simplify the generally applicable capital framework that applies to community banking organizations.
The Fed and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation believe that it is worthwhile to consider extending the cycle for living will submissions from annual to once every two years, and focusing every other of these filings on key topics of interest and material changes from the prior full plan submission.
Third, the Federal Reserve is reassessing whether the Volcker rule implementing regulation most efficiently achieves its policy objectives, and we look forward to working with the other four Volcker rule agencies to find ways to improve that regulation.
In our view, there is room for eliminating or relaxing aspects of the implementing regulation in ways that do not undermine the Volcker rule's main policy goals.
Fourth, we will continue to enhance the transparency of stress testing and the Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR).
We will soon seek public feedback concerning possible forms of enhanced disclosure, including a range of indicative loss rates predicted by the Federal Reserve's models for various loan and securities portfolios, and information about risk characteristics that contribute to the loss-estimate ranges.
We will also provide more detail on the qualitative aspects of stress testing in next week's CCAR disclosure.
Finally, the Federal Reserve is taking a fresh look at the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio.
We believe that the leverage ratio is an important backstop to the risk-based capital framework, but that it is important to get the relative calibrations of the leverage ratio and the risk-based capital requirements right.
banks today are as strong as any in the world.
As we consider the progress that has been achieved in improving the resiliency and resolvability of our banking industry, it is important for us to look for ways to reduce unnecessary burden.
In all of our efforts, our goal is to establish a regulatory framework that helps ensure the resiliency of our financial system, the availability of credit, economic growth, and financial market efficiency.
We look forward to working with our fellow regulatory agencies and with Congress to achieve these important goals.
Just last week, the Alternative Reference Rates Committee (ARRC) selected a new rate suitable for use with new derivative contracts.
I am confident the broad Treasuries repo rate, which the Federal Reserve Bank of New York has proposed publishing in cooperation with the Office of Financial Research, is based on a deep and actively traded market and will be highly robust.
These remarks are substantially similar to the testimony delivered at the Senate Committee on Banking, Housing, & Urban Affairs hearing titled "Fostering Economic Growth: Regulator Perspective" on June 22, 2017.

At the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Symposium on Central Clearing, Chicago, Illinois
Thank you for inviting me to speak today.1 The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago and Darrell Duffie have provided a valuable public service in hosting this annual symposium on central clearing.
I will start my remarks by taking stock of the progress made in strengthening central counterparties (or CCPs), and then offer some thoughts on central clearing and liquidity risks.
The huge losses suffered by the American International Group (AIG) on its over-the-counter derivatives positions contributed to the financial crisis and highlighted the risks in derivatives markets.
In response, the Group of Twenty nations committed in 2009 to moving standardized derivatives to central clearing.
Central clearing serves to address many of the weaknesses exposed during the crisis by fostering a reduction in risk exposures through multilateral netting and daily margin requirements as well as greater transparency through enhanced reporting requirements.
Central clearing also enables a reduction in the potential cost of counterparty default by facilitating the orderly liquidation of a defaulting member's positions, and the sharing of risk among members of the CCP through some mutualization of the costs of such a default.
But central clearing will only make the financial system safer if CCPs themselves are run safely.
Efforts to set heightened expectations for CCPs and other financial market infrastructures have been ongoing for years, with the regulatory community working collectively to clarify and significantly raise expectations.
These efforts resulted in the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures (or PFMI), which was published in 2012 by the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (CPMI) and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO).
The PFMI lays out comprehensive expectations for CCPs and other financial market infrastructures.
Extensive work has been done to implement the PFMI.2 The joint CCP work plan agreed to in 2015 by the Financial Stability Board (or FSB), CPMI, IOSCO, and the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (or BCBS) laid out an ambitious program to provide further guidance on the PFMI and better understand interdependencies between CCPs and their members.3
CPMI and IOSCO will soon publish more granular guidance on CCP resilience, focusing on governance, stress testing credit and liquidity risk, margin, and recovery planning.
The guidance covers a range of topics, including the powers that resolution authorities need in order to effectively resolve a CCP, the potential incentives related to using various loss-allocation tools in resolution, the application of the "no creditor worse off" safeguard, and the formation of crisis management groups--a key step in facilitating cross-border regulatory coordination in the event of a failure of a systemically important CCP.
Ensuring the safety of the system also requires an understanding of the interdependencies between CCPs and their clearing members.
Preliminary analysis confirms that there are large interdependencies between banks and CCPs, including common exposures related to financial resources held to cover market and credit risk, as well as common lending and funding arrangements.
Having pushed for the move to greater central clearing, global authorities have a responsibility to ensure that CCPs do not themselves become a point of failure for the system.
The progress I have just described is helping to meet this responsibility by making central clearing safer and more robust.
Global authorities also have a responsibility to ensure that bank capital standards and other policies do not unnecessarily discourage central clearing.
In my view, the calibration of the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio (SLR) for the U.S.
global systemically important banks (G-SIBs) should be reconsidered from this perspective.
A risk-insensitive leverage ratio can be a useful backstop to risk-based capital requirements.
But such a ratio can have perverse incentives if it is the binding capital requirement because it treats relatively safe activities, such as central clearing, as equivalent to the most risky activities.
For example, the BCBS is currently considering a proposal that would set a G-SIB's SLR surcharge at a level that is proportional to the G-SIB's risk-based capital surcharge.
context could help to reduce the cost that the largest banks face in offering clearing services to their customers.
Under this approach, daily variation margin is treated as a settlement payment rather than as posting collateral.
Under our capital rules, this approach reduces the need for a bank to hold capital against these exposures under risk-based and supplementary leverage ratios.
Second, we are also working to move from the "current exposure method" of assessing counterparty credit risk on derivative exposures to the standardized approach for counterparty credit risk (SA-CCR).
The current exposure method generally treats potential future credit exposures on derivatives as a fixed percentage of the notional amount, which ignores whether a derivative is margined and undervalues netting benefits.
CCPs are different from most other financial intermediaries in the sense that the CCP stands between two parties to a cleared transaction whose payment obligations exactly offset each other.
A CCP faces market or credit risk only in the event that one of its members defaults and its required initial margin or other pre-funded financial resources are insufficient to cover any adverse price swings that occur during the period between the time of default and the time that the CCP is able to liquidate the defaulting party's positions.
However, like most other financial intermediaries, CCPs do face liquidity risks.
For this reason, CCPs should carefully consider liquidity when launching new products and only offer clearing of products that can be sold quickly, even in times of stress.
Liquidity problems can occur in central clearing even if all counterparties have the financial resources to meet their obligations, if they are unable to convert those resources into cash quickly enough.
The amount of liquidity risk that CCPs face can sometimes dwarf the amount of credit or market risk they face.
This is particularly true for the clearing of cash securities such as Treasuries.
In that case, the securities being cleared are extremely safe and likely to rise in value in times of stress.
But in contrast to most cleared derivatives, the cash payments involved are very large because counterparties exchange cash for the delivery of the security on a gross basis.
And if the CCP holds either cash or securities denominated in a currency different from the one in which payment must be made, it will need to either engage in a spot FX transaction or in an FX swap.
Principle seven of the PFMI addresses these liquidity risks, calling for all CCPs to meet a "Cover 1 standard"--that is, to hold enough liquid resources in all relevant currencies to make payments on time in the event of the default of the clearing member that would generate the largest payment obligation under a wide range of potential stress scenarios.
More complex CCPs and those with a systemic presence in multiple jurisdictions are encouraged to meet a "Cover 2 standard." The PFMI also provide guidance on the resources that qualify in meeting these requirements: cash held at a central bank or a creditworthy commercial bank, committed lines of credit, committed repurchase agreements, committed FX swap agreements, or highly marketable collateral that can be converted into cash under prearranged and highly reliable funding arrangements.
First, where should CCPs put their cash? As central clearing has expanded, CCPs have had to deal with increasingly large amounts of cash margin.
But regulatory changes have made it more expensive for banks to take large deposits from other financial firms, and in some cases banks may be unwilling to accept more cash from a CCP.
And many of the largest banks are also clearing members, which introduces a certain amount of wrong-way risk.
A clearing-member default could be especially fraught if the defaulting bank also held large cash balances for the CCP.
If it is available, the ability to deposit cash at a central bank allows for another safe, flexible, and potentially attractive option--a subject I will return to later.
Second, how can CCPs be assured that they will be able to convert securities into cash or draw on other resources in times of stress? The PFMI uses the words "committed" and "pre-arranged" in describing qualifying liquid resources.
Indeed, the PFMI does not view spot transactions on the open market as reliable sources of liquidity during times of stress.
Liquidity plans should not take for granted that, at a time of stress involving a member default, lines of credit, repurchase agreements, or FX swaps could be arranged on the spot.
Committed sources of liquidity are more likely to be available.
They also allow market participants and regulators to make sure that plans are mutually consistent.
If a CCP has arranged for a committed liquidity source, then the provider should account for it in its own plans and demonstrate that it can meet its commitment.
Of course, this liquidity is not free, nor should it be.
Regulatory changes have forced banks to closely examine their liquidity planning and to internalize the costs of liquidity provision.
The costs of committed liquidity facilities will be passed on to clearing members.
These costs are perhaps highest in clearing Treasury securities, where liquidity needs can be especially large.
While initial and variation margin help mitigate credit risk in central clearing, they can also create liquidity risk.
Clearing members and their clients are required to make margin payments to CCPs on a daily basis, and in times of market volatility these payments may rise dramatically.
This source of liquidity risk can occur even in the absence of a default.
Margin calls were also quite large after the stock market crash of October 1987.
That episode helps to demonstrate how complicated payments flows can be and why liquidity risk also needs to be viewed from a macroprudential perspective, considering potential risks to flows across the system.
After falling about 9 percent the week before, on October 19, 1987, the S&P 500 stock market index fell about 20 percent.
Margin calls were about 10 times their normal size, and caused a very complicated set of payment flows across multiple exchanges, CCPs, and banks.6
The next slide helps to represent the ensuing payment flows.7 Calls requesting payment are on the left in red.
When making a margin call, a CCP requests payment from its clearing members.
Clearing members in turn request margin payments from the customers for whom they are clearing, and those customers must then direct their bank to make the payment.
The customer's bank will deliver the requested payment to the clearing member's bank (or payment bank).
The payment bank will then deliver the funds to a settlement bank used by the CCP, and the settlement bank will then credit the funds to the CCP.
In theory, each of these payments would have to happen sequentially, but often parties offer intraday credit (represented by the dashed orange lines) to help smooth these flows.
For example, the settlement bank may provide intraday credit to the clearing member, sending funds to the CCP before the member has delivered funds to the payment bank or before those funds have been transferred to the settlement bank.
Clearing members or the customer's bank may also provide intraday credit to their customers, again making payments before funds have been received in order to help speed the payments chain.
Over the course of October 19, 1987, the system worked largely as I have just described.
But on October 20, every single link in these payments and credit chains was interrupted.
By that morning, many settlement banks and clearing members had yet to receive offsetting payments for credit that had been extended the previous day.
Goldman Sachs and Kidder, Peabody had together extended $1.5 billion in credit that had not yet been paid.8 As a result, some firms pulled back on providing further credit, which then forced each link of the payments chain to operate sequentially.
The Federal Reserve reacted to this threat by encouraging banks to continue to extend credit and by injecting funds into the system to help ensure that credit was available.
The 1987 stock market crash did not leave much lasting impact on the economy, but if these liquidity problems had been allowed to cause the default of a major clearing member or even a CCP then it could have had a much more serious impact.
While this might seem like simply an interesting bit of history, the payments chains involved in central clearing are still very similar today.
To guard against the same sorts of liquidity risk today, we need to make sure that every link in these chains will work as it is intended to under stress.
While neither Brexit nor the October 1987 crash involved a clearing member default, these incidents do point to the potential complications of such a default.
I have already discussed the steps that a CCP might need to take in the event of a default to meet its liquidity needs.
Some of those needs, such as committed lines of credit or repo agreements, could involve tapping financial resources at the same banks that are clearing members.
Thus, clearing members may need to juggle several different liquidity exposures simultaneously in the event of a default.
They may face draws on committed sources of liquidity, and if there are market stresses around the default, which seems a near certainty, they may at the same time face a sudden increase in intraday margin calls and their own internal demands for more liquid resources.9 These are risks that we should seek to understand better.
The Federal Reserve is the primary supervisory authority for two designated financial market utilities (or DFMUs), and plays a secondary role relative to the six other DFMUs.
As a central bank, we are particularly concerned with liquidity issues.10 I will address four policy issues that need careful consideration as the public sector and market participants continue to address liquidity risks in central clearing.
The 1987 stock market crash showed that we need to look at liquidity risks from a systemwide perspective.
That event involved multiple CCPs and also involved multiple links in the payments chains between banks and CCPs.
Conducting supervisory stress tests on CCPs that take liquidity risks into account would help authorities better assess the resilience of the financial system.
A stress test focused on cross-CCP liquidity risks could help to identify assumptions that are not mutually consistent; for example, if each CCP's plans involve liquidating Treasuries, is it realistic to believe that every CCP could do so simultaneously?
Authorities in both the United States and Europe have made progress in conducting supervisory stress tests of CCPs.
In the United States, the CFTC conducted a useful set of tests of five major CCPs last year.11 The tests analyzed each individual institution's ability to withstand the credit risks emanating from the default of one or more clearing members.
It would be useful to build on it by adding tests that focus on liquidity risks across CCPs and their largest common clearing members.
Such an exercise could focus on the robustness of the system as a whole rather than individual CCPs.
The European Securities and Markets Authority is already expanding its supervisory stress testing exercise to incorporate liquidity risk.
A similar exercise here in the United States should be seriously considered.
The industry collectively needs to ensure that the liquidity flows involved in central clearing are handled efficiently and in a way that minimizes potential disruption.
For example, LCH has subsequently made changes to its intraday margining procedures in an effort to reduce liquidity pressures on its clearing members, allowing them to offset losses on their client accounts with gains on the house account.12
Other CCPs are also actively engaged in efforts to increase their efficiency.FICC is looking at potential solutions using distributed ledger technology to clear both legs of overnight repo trades, which could allow for greater netting opportunities and thereby reduce potential liquidity needs.13 Several CCPs are also looking at ways to expand central clearing to directly include more buy-side firms, which could also offer greater netting opportunities.
Doing so could also offer new sources of liquidity if the new entrants are able to take part in the CCP's committed liquidity arrangements.
Diversification of sources of liquidity would offer tangible benefits--CCPs would avoid relying on the same limited set of clearing members for all of their liquidity needs.
As regulators, we should encourage innovations that increase clearing efficiency and reduce liquidity risks where they meet the PFMI and our supervisory expectations.
Title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Act authorized the Federal Reserve to establish accounts for DFMUs, and we now have accounts with each of the eight institutions that the Financial Stability Oversight Council has so designated.
These accounts permit DFMUs to hold funds at the Federal Reserve, but not to borrow from it.14 Allowing DFMUs to deposit balances at the Federal Reserve helps them avoid some of the risk involved in holding balances with their clearing members.
Doing so also provides CCPs with a flexible way to hold balances on days when margin payments unexpectedly spike and it is difficult to find banks that are willing to accept an unexpected influx in deposits.
The availability of Fed accounts could help avoid potential market disruptions in those types of circumstances.
As far as liquidity risks are concerned, it is immaterial whether a CCP is based in the United States or abroad so long as it clears U.S.
Efforts to address these liquidity risks should carefully take into consideration the effect that they would have on the broader financial system.
For example, splintering central clearing by currency area would fragment liquidity and reduce netting opportunities, which in the case of events like Brexit could actually trigger even greater liquidity risk.
In the years following the financial crisis, one of the primary lessons for market participants and their regulators was the criticality of liquidity risk management.
Financial firms such as Lehman Brothers and AIG struggled to obtain sufficient liquidity to meet their obligations.
Liquidity is also a crucial concern in central clearing, and while regulatory reforms have done much to strengthen both CCPs and their clearing members, we should continue to make progress in creating a more robust and efficient system.
The views I express here are my own and not necessarily those of others at the Federal Reserve.
Several different assessments have been completed to date and the findings have provided important insight on both the progress and methods by which authorities and CCPs have sought to implement the PFMI.
In 2014, CPMI-IOSCO published supplemental guidance and a menu of recovery tools to help financial market infrastructures, including CCPs, meet the expectations in the PFMI that all financial market infrastructures have a comprehensive and effective recovery plan.
While the work done in the context of the joint work plan represents significant regulatory efforts related to CCPs, progress is also being made on a parallel path.
In particular, it is important to highlight the adoption and implementation of the SEC's Covered Clearing Agency Standards, which further strengthens the risk management standards that clearing agencies registered with the SEC must meet.
In addition, the SEC and the industry have been working jointly to shorten the settlement cycle to two days for many securities products, culminating in the SEC's adoption of amendments to Rule 15c6-1(a) earlier this year.
"Treasury repos may hit 20bp under DTCC liquidity plan," Risk.net, November 25, 2015.
This figure is an adaptation from one presented in Andrew Brimmer (1989), "Central Banking and Systemic Risks in Capital Markets," Journal of Economic Perspectives, Spring, 3–16.
Regulatory changes since the financial crisis have encouraged banks to hold much greater amounts of high-quality liquid assets, which would help them in meeting such liquidity demands.
Section 804 of the Dodd-Frank Act requires the Financial Stability Oversight Council to designate those financial market utilities that the council determines are, or are likely to become, systemically important.
Eight utilities have been designated: The Clearing House Payments Company, L.L.C.; CLS Bank International; Chicago Mercantile Exchange, Inc.; The Depository Trust Company; Fixed Income Clearing Corporation; ICE Clear Credit L.L.C.; National Securities Clearing Corporation; and The Options Clearing Corporation.
"Supervisory Stress Test of Clearinghouses (PDF)," Commodity Futures Trading Commission, November 2016.
LCH has also moved forward by one hour the timing of the last intraday margin call and made procedural changes that will speed up the processing of the call, which should also help with payment flows.
"DTCC & Digital Asset Move to Next Phase after Successful Proof-Of-Concept for Repo Transactions Using Distributed Ledger Technology," DTCC, February 2017.
According to title VIII of the Dodd-Frank Act, a designated financial market utility may only borrow from the discount window only in unusual and exigent circumstances and only upon a majority vote of the Board of Governors following consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury.

In addition to its role in financial stability, or instability, housing is also a sector that draws on and faces heavy government intervention, even in economies that generally rely on market mechanisms.
Today I would like to focus on where we now stand on the role of housing and real estate in financial crises, and what we should be doing about that situation.
We shall discuss primarily the situation in the United States, and to a much lesser extent, that in other countries.
In many countries, including the United States, taxpayers can deduct interest paid on home mortgages, and various initiatives by state and local authorities support lower-income homebuyers.
They guarantee credit to consumers through housing agencies such as the U.S.
Federal Housing Administration or the Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation.7 The Canadian government also guarantees mortgages on banks' books.
Government intervention in the United States has also addressed the problem of the fundamental illiquidity of mortgages.
Going back 100 years, before the Great Depression, the U.S.
mortgage system relied on small institutions with local deposit bases and lending markets.
In the face of widespread runs at the start of the Great Depression, banks holding large portfolios of illiquid home loans had to close, exacerbating the contraction.
In response, the Congress established housing agencies as part of the New Deal to facilitate housing market liquidity by providing a way for banks to mutually insure and sell mortgages.8
In time, the housing agencies, augmented by post-World War II efforts to increase homeownership, grew and became the familiar government-sponsored enterprises, or GSEs: Fannie, Freddie, and the Federal Home Loan Banks (FHLBs).
The GSEs bought mortgages from both bank and nonbank mortgage originators, and in turn, the GSEs bundled these loans and securitized them; these mortgage-backed securities were then sold to investors.
The resulting deep securitized market supported mortgage liquidity and led to broader homeownership.9
While the benefits to society from homeownership could suggest a case for government involvement in securitization and other measures to expand mortgage credit availability, these benefits are not without costs.
One particularly problematic policy is government guarantees of mortgage-related assets.
agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) were viewed by investors as having an implicit government guarantee, despite the GSEs' representations to the contrary.
Because of the perceived guarantee, investors did not fully internalize the consequence of defaults, and so risk was mispriced in the agency MBS market.
This mispricing can be notable, and is attributable not only to the improved liquidity, but also to implicit government guarantees.10 Taken together, the government guarantee and resulting lower mortgage rates likely boosted both mortgage credit extended and the rise in house prices in the run-up to the crisis.
Another factor boosting credit availability and house price appreciation before the crisis was extensive securitization.11 In the United States, securitization through both public and private entities weakened the housing finance system by contributing to lax lending standards, rendering the mid-2000 house price bust more severe.12 Although the causes are somewhat obscure, it does seem that securitization weakened the link between the mortgage loan and the lender, resulting in risks that were not sufficiently calculated or internalized by institutions along the intermediation chain.
Although securitization in Ireland amounted to only about 10 percent of outstanding mortgages in 2007, lax lending standards and light regulatory oversight contributed to the housing boom and bust in Ireland.15
Since then, to damp the house price-credit cycle that can lead to a housing crisis, countries worldwide have worked to create or expand existing macroprudential policies that would, in principle, limit credit growth and the rate of house price appreciation.16
The limits can also be adjusted in response to conditions in housing markets; for example, the Financial Policy Committee of the Bank of England has the authority to tighten LTV or DTI limits when threats to financial stability emerge from the U.K.
One study conducted across 119 countries from 2000 to 2013 suggests that lower LTV limits lead to slower credit growth.17 In addition, evidence from a range of studies suggests that decreases in the LTV ratio lead to a slowing of the rate of house price appreciation.18 However, some other research suggests that the effectiveness of LTV limits is not significant or somewhat temporary.19
First and foremost, tightening bank capital regulation enhances loss-absorbing capacity, strengthening financial system resilience.
In addition, bank capital requirements for mortgages that increase when house prices rise may be used to lean against mortgage credit growth and house price appreciation.20 These policies are intended to make bank mortgage lending more expensive, leading borrowers to reduce their demand for credit, which tends to push house prices down.
Estimates of the effects of such changes vary widely: After consideration of a range of estimates from the literature, an increase of 50 percentage points in the risk weights on mortgages would result in a house price decrease from as low as 0.6 percent to as high as 4.0 percent.21 These policies are more effective if borrowers are fairly sensitive to a rise in interest rates and if migration of intermediation outside the banking sector to nonbanks is limited.
Of course, regulatory reforms and in some countries, macroprudential policies‑‑are still being implemented, and analysis is currently under way to monitor the effects.
So far, research suggests that macroprudential tightening is associated with slower bank credit growth, slower housing credit growth, and less house price appreciation.
As Atif Mian and Amir Sufi have pointed out, this deterioration in household balance sheets can lead to a substantial drop in consumption and employment.22 Extensive mortgage foreclosures--that is, undertaking the legal process to evict borrowers and repossess the house and then selling the house--as a response to household distress can exacerbate the downturn by imposing substantial dead-weight costs and, as properties are sold, causing house prices to fall further.23
Modifying loans rather than foreclosing on them, including measures such as reducing the principal balance of a loan or changing the loan terms, can allow borrowers to stay in their homes.
First, they standardized protocols for modification, which provided servicers of private-label securities some sense of common practice.
This last policy was to ensure that borrowers could actually repay the modified loans, which prompted lenders to agree more readily to the modification policies in the first place.
Many of the most egregious practices that emerged during the lending boom in the United States‑‑such as no- or low-documentation loans or negatively amortizing mortgages‑‑have been severely limited.
Canadian authorities withdrew government insurance backing on non-amortizing lines of credit secured by homes.
The United States and the European Union required issuers of securities to retain some of the credit risk in them to better align incentives among participants (although in the United States, MBS issued by Fannie and Freddie are currently exempt from this requirement).
Globally, the introduction of new capital and liquidity regulations has increased the resilience of the banking system.
Fannie, Freddie, and the Federal Housing Administration are now the dominant providers of mortgage funding, and the FHLBs have expanded their balance sheets notably.
House prices are now high and rising in several countries, perhaps as a result of extended periods of low interest rates.
Each policy has its own merits and working out their respective advantages is important.
To that extent, government support, where present, should be explicit rather than implicit, and the costs should be balanced against the benefits, including greater liquidity in housing finance engendered through a uniform, guaranteed instrument.
Third, a capital regime that takes the possibility of severe stress seriously is important to calm markets and restart the normal process of intermediation should a crisis materialize.
A well-capitalized banking system is a necessary condition for stability in bank-based financial systems as well as those with large nonbank sectors.
This necessity points to the importance of having resilient banking systems and also stress testing the system against scenarios with sharp declines in house prices.
In the United States, as around the world, much has been done.
The core of the financial system is much stronger, the worst lending practices have been curtailed, much progress has been made in processes to reduce unnecessary foreclosures, and the actions associated with the Housing and Economic Recovery Act of 2008 created some improvement over the previous ambiguity surrounding the status of government support for Fannie and Freddie.
But there is more to be done, and much improvement to be preserved and built on, for the world as we know it cannot afford another pair of crises of the magnitude of the Great Recession and the Global Financial Crisis.
"Credit Supply and House Prices: Evidence from Mortgage Market Segmentation," NBER Working Paper Series 17832.
"Do Strict Capital Requirements Raise the Cost of Capital? Banking Regulation and the Low Risk Anomaly," NBER Working Paper Series 19018.
"Securitization, Risk-Transferring, and Financial Instability: The Case of Spain," Journal of International Money and Finance, vol.
"What Happens during Recessions, Crunches, and Busts?" Economic Policy, vol.
and Irish Credit Crises: Their Distinctive Differences and Common Features," Journal of International Money and Finance, vol.
"Can Cheap Credit Explain the Housing Boom?" NBER Working Paper Series 16230.
"A Macroprudential Approach to Financial Regulation," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
"Housing Finance and Financial Stability--Back to Basics?" in Global Financial Stability Report.
"Can Non-Interest Rate Policies Stabilize Housing Markets? Evidence from a Panel of 57 Economies," Journal of Financial Stability, vol.
Assessing the Macroeconomic Impact of the Transition to Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements (PDF) (final report).
"Household Balance Sheets, Consumption, and the Economic Slump," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.
"The Jumbo-Conforming Spread: A Semiparametric Approach (PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-01.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.
Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the European System of Central Banks (2009).
"The Welfare Cost of Bank Capital Requirements," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
I am grateful to Elizabeth Klee, Andreas Lehnert, Mary Tian, and Alexandros Vardoulakis of the Federal Reserve Board for their assistance.
Views expressed in this presentation are my own and not necessarily those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Cerutti, Dagher, and Dell'Arricia (2015) find that the probability of a credit and house price boom being followed within three years by a recession is between 59 and 67 percent, depending on the precise definition of a boom episode.
Research suggests that homeownership is correlated with higher educational attainment (Aaronson 2000), community involvement (DiPasquale and Glaeser, 1999) and lower crime incidence (Rohe and Lindblad, 2013).
See the International Monetary Fund's April 2011 Global Financial Stability Report, table 3.5, p.126.
The National Housing Act of 1934 established the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) and the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC).
See Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the European System of Central Banks (2009).
See Task Force of the Monetary Policy Committee of the European System of Central Banks (2009) and Connor, Flavin, and O'Kelly (2012).
See Kuttner and Shim (2016) and International Monetary Fund (2014).
For example, in 2016, the Norges Bank used house price appreciation as a criterion for raising its countercyclical capital buffer.
Based on a range of estimates for banks' cost of capital and for the elasticity of house prices with respect to interest rates.
See Adelino, Schoar, and Severino (2012); Glaeser, Gottlieb, and Gyourko (2010); and Rappoport (2016) for a range of estimates for the elasticity of house prices with respect to interest rates.

At the 2014 Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture, International Monetary Fund, Washington, D.C.
It is an honor to deliver the inaugural Michel Camdessus Central Banking Lecture.
Michel Camdessus served with distinction as governor of the Banque de France and was one of the longest-serving managing directors of the International Monetary Fund (IMF).
In these roles, he was well aware of the challenges central banks face in their pursuit of price stability and full employment, and of the interconnections between macroeconomic stability and financial stability.
These episodes took place in emerging market economies, but since then, the global financial crisis and, more recently, the euro crisis have reminded us that no economy is immune from financial instability and the adverse effects on employment, economic activity, and price stability that financial crises cause.
The recent crises have appropriately increased the focus on financial stability at central banks around the world.
At the Federal Reserve, we have devoted substantially increased resources to monitoring financial stability and have refocused our regulatory and supervisory efforts to limit the buildup of systemic risk.
There have also been calls, from some quarters, for a fundamental reconsideration of the goals and strategy of monetary policy.
Today I will focus on a key question spurred by this debate: How should monetary and other policymakers balance macroprudential approaches and monetary policy in the pursuit of financial stability?
In my remarks, I will argue that monetary policy faces significant limitations as a tool to promote financial stability: Its effects on financial vulnerabilities, such as excessive leverage and maturity transformation, are not well understood and are less direct than a regulatory or supervisory approach; in addition, efforts to promote financial stability through adjustments in interest rates would increase the volatility of inflation and employment.
As a result, I believe a macroprudential approach to supervision and regulation needs to play the primary role.
Such an approach should focus on "through the cycle" standards that increase the resilience of the financial system to adverse shocks and on efforts to ensure that the regulatory umbrella will cover previously uncovered systemically important institutions and activities.
I am also mindful of the potential for low interest rates to heighten the incentives of financial market participants to reach for yield and take on risk, and of the limits of macroprudential measures to address these and other financial stability concerns.
Accordingly, there may be times when an adjustment in monetary policy may be appropriate to ameliorate emerging risks to financial stability.
Because of this possibility, and because transparency enhances the effectiveness of monetary policy, it is crucial that policymakers communicate their views clearly on the risks to financial stability and how such risks influence the appropriate monetary policy stance.
I will conclude by briefly laying out how financial stability concerns affect my current assessment of the appropriate stance of monetary policy.
Balancing Financial Stability with Price Stability: Lessons from the Recent Past
When considering the connections between financial stability, price stability, and full employment, the discussion often focuses on the potential for conflicts among these objectives.
But it is important to note that, in many ways, the pursuit of financial stability is complementary to the goals of price stability and full employment.
A smoothly operating financial system promotes the efficient allocation of saving and investment, facilitating economic growth and employment.
A strong labor market contributes to healthy household and business balance sheets, thereby contributing to financial stability.
And price stability contributes not only to the efficient allocation of resources in the real economy, but also to reduced uncertainty and efficient pricing in financial markets, which in turn supports financial stability.
Despite these complementarities, monetary policy has powerful effects on risk taking.
Indeed, the accommodative policy stance of recent years has supported the recovery, in part, by providing increased incentives for households and businesses to take on the risk of potentially productive investments.
But such risk-taking can go too far, thereby contributing to fragility in the financial system.1 This possibility does not obviate the need for monetary policy to focus primarily on price stability and full employment--the costs to society in terms of deviations from price stability and full employment that would arise would likely be significant.
I will highlight these potential costs and the clear need for a macroprudential policy approach by looking back at the vulnerabilities in the U.S.
I will also discuss how these vulnerabilities might have been affected had the Federal Reserve tightened monetary policy in the mid-2000s to promote financial stability.
Although it was not recognized at the time, risks to financial stability within the United States escalated to a dangerous level in the mid-2000s.
Policymakers failed to anticipate that the reversal of the house price bubble would trigger the most significant financial crisis in the United States since the Great Depression because that reversal interacted with critical vulnerabilities in the financial system and in government regulation.
In the private sector, key vulnerabilities included high levels of leverage, excessive dependence on unstable short-term funding, weak underwriting of loans, deficiencies in risk measurement and risk management, and the use of exotic financial instruments that redistributed risk in nontransparent ways.
In the public sector, vulnerabilities included gaps in the regulatory structure that allowed some systemically important financial institutions (SIFIs) and markets to escape comprehensive supervision, failures of supervisors to effectively use their existing powers, and insufficient attention to threats to the stability of the system as a whole.
It is not uncommon to hear it suggested that the crisis could have been prevented or significantly mitigated by substantially tighter monetary policy in the mid-2000s.
At the very least, however, such an approach would have been insufficient to address the full range of critical vulnerabilities I have just described.
A tighter monetary policy would not have closed the gaps in the regulatory structure that allowed some SIFIs and markets to escape comprehensive supervision; a tighter monetary policy would not have shifted supervisory attention to a macroprudential perspective; and a tighter monetary policy would not have increased the transparency of exotic financial instruments or ameliorated deficiencies in risk measurement and risk management within the private sector.
Some advocates of the view that a substantially tighter monetary policy may have helped prevent the crisis might acknowledge these points, but they might also argue that a tighter monetary policy could have limited the rise in house prices, the use of leverage within the private sector, and the excessive reliance on short-term funding, and that each of these channels would have contained--or perhaps even prevented--the worst effects of the crisis.
A review of the empirical evidence suggests that the level of interest rates does influence house prices, leverage, and maturity transformation, but it is also clear that a tighter monetary policy would have been a very blunt tool: Substantially mitigating the emerging financial vulnerabilities through higher interest rates would have had sizable adverse effects in terms of higher unemployment.
In particular, a range of studies conclude that tighter monetary policy during the mid-2000s might have contributed to a slower rate of house price appreciation.
But the magnitude of this effect would likely have been modest relative to the substantial momentum in these prices over the period; hence, a very significant tightening, with large increases in unemployment, would have been necessary to halt the housing bubble.2 Such a slowing in the housing market might have constrained the rise in household leverage, as mortgage debt growth would have been slower.
But the job losses and higher interest payments associated with higher interest rates would have directly weakened households' ability to repay previous debts, suggesting that a sizable tightening may have mitigated vulnerabilities in household balance sheets only modestly.3 
Similar mixed results would have been likely with regard to the effects of tighter monetary policy on leverage and reliance on short-term financing within the financial sector.
In particular, the evidence that low interest rates contribute to increased leverage and reliance on short-term funding points toward some ability of higher interest rates to lessen these vulnerabilities, but that evidence is typically consistent with a sizable range of quantitative effects or alternative views regarding the causal channels at work.4 Furthermore, vulnerabilities from excessive leverage and reliance on short-term funding in the financial sector grew rapidly through the middle of 2007, well after monetary policy had already tightened significantly relative to the accommodative policy stance of 2003 and early 2004.
In my assessment, macroprudential policies, such as regulatory limits on leverage and short-term funding, as well as stronger underwriting standards, represent far more direct and likely more effective methods to address these vulnerabilities.5 
Turning to recent experience outside the United States, a number of foreign economies have seen rapidly rising real estate prices, which has raised financial stability concerns despite, in some cases, high unemployment and shortfalls in inflation relative to the central bank's inflation target.6 These developments have prompted debate on how to best balance the use of monetary policy and macroprudential tools in promoting financial stability.
For example, Canada, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom have expressed a willingness to use monetary policy to address financial stability concerns in unusual circumstances, but they have similarly concluded that macroprudential policies should serve as the primary tool to pursue financial stability.
In Canada, with inflation below target and output growth quite subdued, the Bank of Canada has kept the policy rate at or below 1 percent, but limits on mortgage lending were tightened in each of the years from 2009 through 2012, including changes in loan-to-value and debt-to-income caps, among other measures.7 In contrast, in Norway and Sweden, monetary policy decisions have been influenced somewhat by financial stability concerns, but the steps taken have been limited.
In Norway, policymakers increased the policy interest rate in mid-2010 when they were facing escalating household debt despite inflation below target and output below capacity, in part as a way of "guarding against the risk of future imbalances."8 Similarly, Sweden's Riksbank held its policy rate "slightly higher than we would have done otherwise" because of financial stability concerns.9 In both cases, macroprudential actions were also either taken or under consideration.
In reviewing these experiences, it seems clear that monetary policymakers have perceived significant hurdles to using sizable adjustments in monetary policy to contain financial stability risks.
Some proponents of a larger monetary policy response to financial stability concerns might argue that these perceived hurdles have been overblown and that financial stability concerns should be elevated significantly in monetary policy discussions.
A more balanced assessment, in my view, would be that increased focus on financial stability risks is appropriate in monetary policy discussions, but the potential cost, in terms of diminished macroeconomic performance, is likely to be too great to give financial stability risks a central role in monetary policy decisions, at least most of the time.
If monetary policy is not to play a central role in addressing financial stability issues, this task must rely on macroprudential policies.
In this regard, I would note that here, too, policymakers abroad have made important strides, and not just those in the advanced economies.
Emerging market economies have in many ways been leaders in applying macroprudential policy tools, employing in recent years a variety of restrictions on real estate lending or other activities that were perceived to create vulnerabilities.10 Although it is probably too soon to draw clear conclusions, these experiences will help inform our understanding of these policies and their efficacy.
If macroprudential tools are to play the primary role in the pursuit of financial stability, questions remain on which macroprudential tools are likely to be most effective, what the limits of such tools may be, and when, because of such limits, it may be appropriate to adjust monetary policy to "get in the cracks" that persist in the macroprudential framework.11 
Tools that build resilience aim to make the financial system better able to withstand unexpected adverse developments.
For example, requirements to hold sufficient loss-absorbing capital make financial institutions more resilient in the face of unexpected losses.
Such requirements take on a macroprudential dimension when they are most stringent for the largest, most systemically important firms, thereby minimizing the risk that losses at such firms will reverberate through the financial system.
Resilience against runs can be enhanced both by stronger capital positions and requirements for sufficient liquidity buffers among the most interconnected firms.
An effective resolution regime for SIFIs can also enhance resilience by better protecting the financial system from contagion in the event of a SIFI collapse.
Further, the stability of the financial system can be enhanced through measures that address interconnectedness between financial firms, such as margin and central clearing requirements for derivatives transactions.
Finally, a regulatory umbrella wide enough to cover previous gaps in the regulation and supervision of systemically important firms and markets can help prevent risks from migrating to areas where they are difficult to detect or address.
In the United States, considerable progress has been made on each of these fronts.
Changes in bank capital regulations, which will include a surcharge for systemically important institutions, have significantly increased requirements for loss-absorbing capital at the largest banking firms.
The Federal Reserve's stress tests and Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review process require that large financial institutions maintain sufficient capital to weather severe shocks, and that they demonstrate that their internal capital planning processes are effective, while providing perspective on the loss-absorbing capacity across a large swath of the financial system.
The Basel III framework also includes liquidity requirements designed to mitigate excessive reliance by global banks on short-term wholesale funding.
The new Financial Stability Oversight Council has designated some nonbank financial firms as systemically important institutions that are subject to consolidated supervision by the Federal Reserve.
In addition, measures are being undertaken to address some of the potential sources of instability in short-term wholesale funding markets, including reforms to the triparty repo market and money market mutual funds--although progress in these areas has, at times, been frustratingly slow.
Some of these measures--such as requiring firms to hold larger amounts of capital, stable funding, or highly liquid assets based on use of short-term wholesale funding--would likely apply only to the largest, most complex organizations.
Other measures--such as minimum margin requirements for repurchase agreements and other securities financing transactions--could, at least in principle, apply on a marketwide basis.
At this point, it should be clear that I think efforts to build resilience in the financial system are critical to minimizing the chance of financial instability and the potential damage from it.
This focus on resilience differs from much of the public discussion, which often concerns whether some particular asset class is experiencing a "bubble" and whether policymakers should attempt to pop the bubble.
Because a resilient financial system can withstand unexpected developments, identification of bubbles is less critical.
For example, the new Basel III regulatory capital framework includes a countercyclical capital buffer, which may help build additional loss-absorbing capacity within the financial sector during periods of rapid credit creation while also leaning against emerging excesses.
The stress tests include a scenario design process in which the macroeconomic stresses in the scenario become more severe during buoyant economic expansions and incorporate the possibility of highlighting salient risk scenarios, both of which may contribute to increasing resilience during periods in which risks are rising.13 Similarly, minimum margin requirements for securities financing transactions could potentially vary on a countercyclical basis so that they are higher in normal times than in times of stress.
In light of the considerable efforts under way to implement a macroprudential approach to enhance financial stability and the increased focus of policymakers on monitoring emerging financial stability risks, I see three key principles that should guide the interaction of monetary policy and macroprudential policy in the United States.
First, it is critical for regulators to complete their efforts at implementing a macroprudential approach to enhance resilience within the financial system, which will minimize the likelihood that monetary policy will need to focus on financial stability issues rather than on price stability and full employment.
Key steps along this path include completion of the transition to full implementation of Basel III, including new liquidity requirements; enhanced prudential standards for systemically important firms, including risk-based capital requirements, a leverage ratio, and tighter prudential buffers for firms heavily reliant on short-term wholesale funding; expansion of the regulatory umbrella to incorporate all systemically important firms; the institution of an effective, cross-border resolution regime for systemically important financial institutions; and consideration of regulations, such as minimum margin requirements for securities financing transactions, to limit leverage in sectors beyond the banking sector and SIFIs.
Second, policymakers must carefully monitor evolving risks to the financial system and be realistic about the ability of macroprudential tools to influence these developments.
The limitations of macroprudential policies reflect the potential for risks to emerge outside sectors subject to regulation, the potential for supervision and regulation to miss emerging risks, the uncertain efficacy of new macroprudential tools such as a countercyclical capital buffer, and the potential for such policy steps to be delayed or to lack public support.14 Given such limitations, adjustments in monetary policy may, at times, be needed to curb risks to financial stability.15 
These first two principles will be more effective in helping to address financial stability risks when the public understands how monetary policymakers are weighing such risks in the setting of monetary policy.
Because these issues are both new and complex, there is no simple rule that can prescribe, even in a general sense, how monetary policy should adjust in response to shifts in the outlook for financial stability.
As a result, policymakers should clearly and consistently communicate their views on the stability of the financial system and how those views are influencing the stance of monetary policy.
To that end, I will briefly lay out my current assessment of financial stability risks and their relevance, at this time, to the stance of monetary policy in the United States.
In recent years, accommodative monetary policy has contributed to low interest rates, a flat yield curve, improved financial conditions more broadly, and a stronger labor market.
These effects have contributed to balance sheet repair among households, improved financial conditions among businesses, and hence a strengthening in the health of the financial sector.
Moreover, the improvements in household and business balance sheets have been accompanied by the increased safety of the financial sector associated with the macroprudential efforts I have outlined.
Overall, nonfinancial credit growth remains moderate, while leverage in the financial system, on balance, is much reduced.
Reliance on short-term wholesale funding is also significantly lower than immediately before the crisis, although important structural vulnerabilities remain in short-term funding markets.
Taking all of these factors into consideration, I do not presently see a need for monetary policy to deviate from a primary focus on attaining price stability and maximum employment, in order to address financial stability concerns.
For example, corporate bond spreads, as well as indicators of expected volatility in some asset markets, have fallen to low levels, suggesting that some investors may underappreciate the potential for losses and volatility going forward.
In addition, terms and conditions in the leveraged-loan market, which provides credit to lower-rated companies, have eased significantly, reportedly as a result of a "reach for yield" in the face of persistently low interest rates.
The Federal Reserve, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation issued guidance regarding leveraged lending practices in early 2013 and followed up on this guidance late last year.
To date, we do not see a systemic threat from leveraged lending, since broad measures of credit outstanding do not suggest that nonfinancial borrowers, in the aggregate, are taking on excessive debt and the improved capital and liquidity positions at lending institutions should ensure resilience against potential losses due to their exposures.
But we are mindful of the possibility that credit provision could accelerate, borrower losses could rise unexpectedly sharply, and that leverage and liquidity in the financial system could deteriorate.
It is therefore important that we monitor the degree to which the macroprudential steps we have taken have built sufficient resilience, and that we consider the deployment of other tools, including adjustments to the stance of monetary policy, as conditions change in potentially unexpected ways.
In closing, the policy approach to promoting financial stability has changed dramatically in the wake of the global financial crisis.
We have made considerable progress in implementing a macroprudential approach in the United States, and these changes have also had a significant effect on our monetary policy discussions.
An important contributor to the progress made in the United States has been the lessons we learned from the experience gained by central banks and regulatory authorities all around the world.
The IMF plays an important role in this evolving process as a forum for representatives from the world's economies and as an institution charged with promoting financial and economic stability globally.
The possibility that periods of relative economic stability may contribute to risk-taking and the buildup of imbalances that may unwind in a painful manner is often linked to the ideas of Hyman Minsky (see Hyman P.
For a recent example of an economic model that tries to explore these ideas, see, for example, Markus K.
Brunnermeier and Yuliy Sannikov (2014), "A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector," American Economic Review, vol.
For a discussion of this issue encompassing experience across a broad range of advanced economies in the 2000s, including the United States, see Jane Dokko, Brian M.
Kiley, Jinill Kim, Shane Sherlund, Jae Sim, and Skander Van Den Heuvel (2011), "Monetary Policy and the Global Housing Bubble," Economic Policy, vol.
Igan and Loungani (2012) highlight how interest rates are an important, but far from the most important, determinant of housing cycles across countries (see Deniz Igan and Prakash Loungani (2012), "Global Housing Cycles," IMF Working Paper Series WP/12/217 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, August)).
Bean and others (2010), examining the tradeoffs between unemployment, inflation, and stabilization of the housing market in the United Kingdom, imply that reliance on monetary policy to contain a housing boom may be too costly in terms of other monetary policy goals (see Charles Bean, Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver, and Tim Taylor (2010), "Monetary Policy after the Fall (PDF)," paper presented at "Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26-28).
Saiz (2014) suggests that about 50 percent of the variation in house prices during the 2000s boom can be explained by low interest rates, and finds that it was the remaining, "non-fundamental" component that subsequently collapsed--that is, the interest rate component was not a primary factor in what Saiz terms "the bust" (see Albert Saiz (2014), "Interest Rates and Fundamental Fluctuations in Home Values (PDF)," paper presented at the Public Policy and Economics Spring 2014 Workshops, hosted by the Harris School of Public Policy, University of Chicago, April 8).
The notion that tighter monetary policy may have ambiguous effects on leverage or repayment capacity is illustrated in, for example, Anton Korinek and Alp Simsek (2014), "Liquidity Trap and Excessive Leverage (PDF)," NBER Working Paper Series 19970 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March).
418-37; and Tobias Adrian and Hyun Song Shin (2011), "Financial Intermediaries and Monetary Economics," in Benjamin Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol.
For a study emphasizing how changes in the response of monetary policy to financial vulnerabilities would likely change the relationship between monetary policy and financial vulnerabilities, see Oliver de Groot (2014), "The Risk Channel of Monetary Policy (PDF)," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
This evidence and experience suggest that a reliance on monetary policy as a primary tool to address the broad range of vulnerabilities that emerged in the mid-2000s would have had uncertain and limited effects on risks to financial stability.
Such uncertainty does not imply that a modestly tighter monetary policy may not have been marginally helpful.
For example, some research suggests that financial imbalances that became apparent in the mid-2000s may have signaled a tighter labor market and more inflationary pressure than would have been perceived solely from labor market conditions and overall economic activity.
Hence, such financial imbalances may have called for a modestly tighter monetary policy through the traditional policy lens focused on inflationary pressure and economic slack.
Arseneau and Michael Kiley (2014), "The Role of Financial Imbalances in Assessing the State of the Economy," FEDS Notes (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April 18).
For a summary of house price developments across a range of countries through 2013, see International Monetary Fund (2014), "Global Housing Watch." Return to text
For a discussion of macroprudential steps taken in Canada, see Ivo Krznar and James Morsink (2014), "With Great Power Comes Great Responsibility: Macroprudential Tools at Work in Canada," IMF Working Paper Series 14/83 (Washington: International Monetary Fund, May).
See Norges Bank (2010), "The Executive Board's Monetary Policy Decision--Background and General Assessment," press release, May 5, paragraph 28.
See Per Jansson (2013), "How Do We Stop the Trend in Household Debt? Work on Several Fronts," speech delivered at the SvD Bank Summit, Berns Salonger, Stockholm, December 3, p.
These questions have been explored in, for example, International Monetary Fund (2013), The Interaction of Monetary and Macroprudential Policies (PDF) (Washington: IMF, January 29).
The IMF recently discussed tools to build resilience and lean against excesses (and provided a broad overview of macroprudential tools and their interaction with other policies, including monetary policy); see International Monetary Fund (2013), Key Aspects of Macroprudential Policy (PDF) (Washington: IMF, June 10).
See the Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing at Regulation YY--Enhanced Prudential Standards and Early Remediation Requirements for Covered Companies (PDF), 12 C.F.R.
252 (2013), Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing.
For a related discussion, see Elliott, Feldberg, and Lehnert, "The History of Cyclical Macroprudential Policy in the United States." Return to text
Adam and Woodford (2013) present a model in which macroprudential policies are not present and housing prices experience swings for reasons not driven by "fundamentals." In this context, adjustments in monetary policy in response to house price booms--even if such adjustments lead to undesirable inflation or employment outcomes--are a component of optimal monetary policy.
See Klaus Adam and Michael Woodford (2013), "Housing Prices and Robustly Optimal Monetary Policy (PDF)," working paper, June 29.

At the Federal Reserve Third Annual Stress Test Modeling Symposium, Boston, Massachusetts
Born of necessity during the depths of the financial crisis as part of an effort to restore confidence in the U.S.
financial system, supervisory stress testing has in the intervening five years become a cornerstone of a new approach to regulation and supervision of the nation's largest financial institutions.
First, of course, it is a means for assuring that large, complex financial institutions have sufficient capital to allow them to remain viable intermediaries even under highly stressful conditions.
More broadly, supervisory stress testing and the associated review of capital planning processes have provided a platform for building out a regulatory framework that is more dynamic, more macroprudential, and more data-driven than pre-crisis practice.
Each year we have refined elements of both the substance and process of the stress tests.
These changes have been informed not only by our own experience, but also by critiques and suggestions offered by others.
This annual symposium hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston has become an important channel for eliciting reactions and advice from outside experts and the banks subject to the annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR).
Although the major elements of our approach have now been successfully established, I anticipate that we will continue to make enhancements.
If supervisory stress testing is to give regulators, banks, and the public a dynamic view of the capital positions of large financial firms, it must itself respond to changes in the economy, the financial system, and risk-management capabilities.
This morning I will give a retrospective on the first five years of supervisory stress testing, highlighting some of the accomplishments and identifying some areas in which we may consider changes in the future.
Then I would like to turn to a topic that has gained increasing attention in the past couple of years--the qualitative assessment of firms' capital planning processes that we conduct in parallel with our quantitative assessment of firms' capital positions.
The potential value of comprehensive stress testing had been much discussed among academics, analysts, and regulators in the years preceding the financial crisis, but only during the crisis was this supervisory tool first used at the same time across the largest firms.
The Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) demonstrated in practice, not just in theory, the value of simultaneous, forward-looking projections of potential losses and revenues based on each bank's portfolio and circumstances.
The forward-looking feature overcame the limitations of static capital ratios.
The simultaneity, along with stress test features such as the use of common macroeconomic scenarios, introduced a critical macroprudential dimension that offered insights into the condition of the entire financial system, including whether banks were sufficiently resilient to continue to lend to households and businesses under such adverse conditions.
The Federal Reserve's basic approach to stress testing has not changed materially since the SCAP.
We continue to take a multidisciplinary approach, drawing on a wide range of staff expertise.
We create hypothetical macroeconomic scenarios that incorporate an assumed sharp deterioration in economic and financial conditions.
Supervisors estimate each bank's expected losses and revenues and use these estimates to project post-stress capital levels and ratios under the hypothetical scenarios.
The estimated capital ratios are then compared with regulatory benchmarks.
We use common scenarios for all firms; for the firms with the largest trading activities, we add a market-shock scenario that incorporates market turbulence of severity similar to that of the latter half of 2008.
While the basic approach has remained consistent, much else has changed.
In the first place, of course, the requirement for stress testing has become statutory, as Congress drew on the lessons of SCAP in crafting prudential standards for large financial firms in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act).1 Second, the annual supervisory stress test has been incorporated into CCAR, a broader program that requires large banking organizations to submit a capital plan annually.
The CCAR process gives supervisors an opportunity to evaluate plans for capital distributions against the backdrop of the firm's overall capital position under both baseline and hypothesized stressed conditions.
It also provides a regular, structured, and comparative way to assess the capacity of these firms to manage their capital positions and, by implication, more generally to manage their risks.
I will return to this feature of CCAR a bit later.
Third, there have been substantial enhancements to the supervisory stress test.
Perhaps the most important change has been the development of independent supervisory models.
Because the original SCAP was developed on the fly and under considerable time pressure, supervisors necessarily had to rely on firms' own estimates of losses and revenues as a starting point for analysis, although they evaluated the firms' estimates and made significant adjustments.
In each stress test that has followed, and building upon the considerable progress in data collection, we have made completely independent estimates of a progressively greater proportion of potential net income or losses.
We have also refined the formulation of the hypothetical scenarios that form the basis of the stress tests.
The severely adverse scenario is designed to reflect, at a minimum, the economic and financial conditions typical of a severe post-World War II U.S.
recession.2 In devising recession scenarios, we draw on many of the same macroeconomic modeling tools used in making monetary policy.
Because not all significant risks facing banks are tied to the business cycle, our scenarios now incorporate other adverse developments such as an exceptionally large decline in house prices, sharp drops in the value of stocks and other financial assets, or a worsening of global economic conditions more severe than might normally be expected to accompany a deep recession in the United States.
The past two years we have used the adverse scenario to test the impact of a sudden, significant increase in interest rates.
More discrete changes of note include the assumption of default by each firm's largest counterparty and the incorporation of salient risks beyond those in the overall scenarios.3 The former obviously serves a microprudential purpose, but it also could promote systemic stability objectives if it were to identify a single exceptionally large exposure for the entire financial system.
The incorporation of salient risks helps to use stress tests to "lean against the wind," not just build a buffer for future losses.
For example, the 2011 and 2012 scenarios incorporated possible severe stress in Europe.
Inclusion of this factor may have led to greater awareness and better risk management of U.S.
We did not allow banks to assume their balance sheets would shrink in the stress scenarios as a way of meeting the minimum capital charge, something that many banks had done in the stress tests of the past few years.4 Foreclosing this assumption serves the macroprudential goal of helping to ensure that the major financial firms remain sufficiently capitalized to support lending in a severe downturn.
As I have already suggested, we are likely to continue to hone the supervisory stress test.
In particular, I expect that we will devote more attention to developing the macroprudential elements of the stress tests.
For example, we might sharpen our focus on the risks to the financial system of significant common exposures among firms.
We have already adjusted the market shock applied to the trading books of the six largest firms to ensure that firms are not incentivized to hold significant amounts of certain assets simply because they performed well in the second half of 2008.5 But there is more that could be done.
One idea would be to test whether individual firms that are revealed by the tests to be vulnerable to serious stress might engage in asset fire sales that could produce knock-on damage to other firms.
Another would be to incorporate more assumptions pertaining to the increased cost of, or reduced access to, funding in stressed environments, when lots of credit lines may be drawn simultaneously.
In short, we do not regard the supervisory stress test and CCAR as finished products.
In fact, we should never regard them as finished products, since to do so would be to overlook changes in the real economy, financial innovations, and shifts in asset correlations across firms.
But I think it fair to say that supervisory stress testing and the CCAR have already made important contributions to financial stability and, in the process, have led the way in transforming supervision of the nation's largest financial firms.
First, they have played a key role in strengthening dramatically the capital position of the industry.
The firms participating in CCAR have more than doubled their tier 1 common capital since 2009, an increase of $500 billion of additional, high-quality capital in the U.S.
It is noteworthy that supervisors in other countries have themselves been moving toward greater use of stress tests as a centerpiece of efforts to build strong capital positions for their banks.
Most members of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision now use some form of stress testing.6 The European Union and the United Kingdom are currently conducting supervisory stress tests whose results will be publicly released.
Second, they have been the leading edge of a movement toward greater supervisory transparency.
The Federal Reserve's decision in spring 2009 to disclose the results of the SCAP on a firm-specific basis proved to be an important step in re-establishing market and public confidence in the U.S.
In the Dodd-Frank Act, Congress endorsed the practice of disclosing both supervisory and firm stress test results in normal times, as well as in crisis periods.
During the past five years we have progressively increased disclosures of firm-specific information, the methodologies we use, and the details of the stress test scenarios.
From the outset, we have published the broad framework and methodology used in the supervisory stress test, including information about the types of models we use.7 We solicited comments on our design framework for scenarios in 2012, and incorporated into the final document some of the ideas we received--such as providing more information about the economic and financial conditions represented by paths of the variables in the scenarios.8 And this past spring, we published the additional set of stress test results that described how the firms would perform under the adverse scenario, in addition to the results of the severely adverse scenario, which we had previously released.9 
Because bank portfolios are often quite opaque and thus difficult for outsiders to value, this information should allow investors, counterparties, analysts, and markets more generally to make more informed judgments on the condition of U.S.
Coupled with other regulatory measures, this transparency should in turn increase market discipline.
This level of transparency also subjects us to greater outside scrutiny and analysis, a process that increases our accountability as regulators and helps us improve our assumptions and methodology over time.
These choices for greater transparency in the supervisory stress tests and CCAR have prompted healthy discussion on the merits of disclosure in other supervisory areas.
As I think everyone in this audience knows, we have not disclosed the supervisory models themselves.
We do not want firms simply to copy our modeling in their own assessment of risks and capital needs.
The models are evaluated by a special model validation group made up of experts within the Federal Reserve who do not work on the stress tests.
The third important effect of the supervisory stress tests and CCAR has been to pave the way for other horizontal, simultaneous supervisory exercises.
We created the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC) in 2010 to implement an approach to supervision of systemically important firms that was better coordinated, more data-driven, and more focused on the largest institutions as a group.11 While CCAR includes a number of firms that are not in the LISCC portfolio, the stress tests and CCAR have been the proving ground for LISCC, and as the committee has evolved to administer these programs more efficiently, these exercises have shown the way to other horizontal supervisory exercises or assessments.
Some, like the newer Comprehensive Liquidity Analysis and Review, which focuses on assessing liquidity sufficiency and banks' internal liquidity risk-management practices, are intended to be recurring.
Fourth, and in some sense an extension of the prior point, CCAR in particular has defined an approach toward developing and maintaining better risk management within the banking organizations subject to these exercises.
Here again, the origins of our current program lie in our experience with the SCAP in 2009, during which we learned a great deal beyond just post-stress loss and capital numbers.
The horizontal, cross-firm nature of the exercise also allowed us to evaluate and compare the effectiveness of the firms' processes for determining and addressing their own capital needs.
We discovered that, at the time, many of the firms had critical deficiencies in the fundamental risk-measurement and risk-management practices necessary to assess their capital needs.
Many firms did not have a systematic program for assessing their capital needs and even lacked the basic data on firm-wide risks and exposures needed to begin such a program.
Not surprisingly, there appeared to be a correlation between firms found to be insufficiently capitalized to withstand further financial and economic stress and firms lacking effective processes for assessing their risks and vulnerabilities.
In response to these deficiencies, the Federal Reserve initiated the annual CCAR process for assessing the capital adequacy and internal capital planning processes of large, complex bank holding companies (BHCs).
CCAR is premised on the belief that thorough, rigorous risk management must underpin all the activities of all such firms.
Risks that are identified and understood can be evaluated and, where appropriate, assumed with proper safeguards and capital planning.
Risks that are overlooked, misunderstood, or taken outside of a well-considered and comprehensive risk-management framework plant the seeds for serious trouble for individual firms and potentially for the financial system.
Through CCAR, we have sought to ensure not only that all large BHCs have strong capital positions as determined through our supervisory stress test, but also that they have strong capital planning practices that are appropriately focused on the capital needed to withstand possible losses from the specific risks in each firm's business model.
These processes, grounded in strong quantitative and qualitative risk management, also give supervisors a clearer window into each firm's activities and thus increase the effectiveness of regular supervision.
Since the first CCAR there has been notable improvement in the firms' capital planning processes.
Many firms have made meaningful investments in their risk-measurement processes, including significant enhancements to their internal data and management information systems.
Many firms have adopted a formal framework to inform their capital planning through an analysis of their vulnerabilities and capital adequacy under a range of potential adverse scenarios.
They have also taken steps to enhance the integrity of their risk measures, analysis, and the decision-making around their capital levels and distributions.
Despite these advances, there is continuing need for improvement in the firms' capital planning processes.
Some firms still lack reliable information about their businesses and exposures.
Firms also are sometimes unable to measure or understand how stressful conditions can change the performance of their material business lines.
The importance we attach to these risk-management and capital planning processes is reflected in the component of CCAR known as the qualitative assessment.
This assessment covers a range of topics, including the extent to which the design of a firm's internal scenario captures the specific risks from the firm's activities, the firm's methods for projecting losses under stress scenarios, and how the firm identifies appropriate capital levels and plans for distributions.
As detailed in our CCAR regulation, where these processes are found to be inadequate, or to raise safety and soundness concerns, they may form the basis for an objection by the Board of Governors to the capital distribution plans of a firm.12 If a firm's internal processes are unreliable, supervisors will necessarily be concerned that a firm may not properly have assessed risks clearly and, where needed, assured adequate capital for the many risks that cannot be fully captured by standardized stress tests.
First, as I have already noted, many firms had a long way to go to meet high standards of capital planning backed by strong risk management when we began CCAR.
Given that initial gap, we have allowed time for firms to work toward full achievement of those standards.
Thus, what may be perceived as a raising of the bar every year is better understood as our effort to provide a demanding, but still realistic, glide path for firms to reach that goal.
We do, however, expect firms to continue to make steady progress each year.
Second, the horizontal nature of the qualitative assessment does not mean that every year one or more firms must receive an objection on qualitative grounds.
The comparative approach helps ensure that firms are evaluated consistently and fairly.
And it does allow us to see where specific firms may be outliers from good practices followed in the rest of the industry.
Third, while there are minimum standards for all CCAR firms, the standards are more stringent for firms of greater systemic importance.13 It is not enough for the largest and most complex banking organizations to meet only the minimum standards in CCAR.
We expect the more systemically important firms to establish and maintain the most sophisticated risk-management and capital planning practices.
Their risk management and capital adequacy should be sufficiently strong to help ensure their resiliency to a range of unexpected stress events, since their distress could pose a threat to the financial system and to the broader economy.
Fourth, precisely because of its importance to our supervisory program, the qualitative assessment will continue to be progressively more integrated into year-round supervision of the CCAR firms.
While some important features of capital planning are observable only during the formal CCAR process, most of the risk-management and capital planning standards incorporated in CCAR are operative and observable by supervisors throughout the year.
These should be an important focus of ongoing supervisory oversight and of discussions between firms and supervisors.
Only in unusual circumstances should supervisors learn for the first time during CCAR of significant problems in the quality of the capital planning processes, and only in unusual circumstances should firms be surprised at the outcome of the qualitative assessment.
To the extent weaknesses or areas for improvement are identified, those letters provide a basis for regular stocktaking by both firms and supervisors.
More generally, last year we released a paper on our expectations for all aspects of capital planning, providing greater detail than what is included in the annual CCAR instructions.14 
I anticipate that we will take additional steps to integrate ongoing supervisory assessments of risk-management and other internal control processes with the annual CCAR exercise, and to assure that communications in both directions are heard.
One such step has just recently begun: The committee chaired by senior Board staff that is responsible for the oversight of CCAR, supported by the relevant horizontal assessment teams, will directly engage with firms during the course of the year to evaluate progress in remediating weaknesses or other issues identified in the post-CCAR letters.
Increasingly, our regular supervisory work on topics such as risk-identification and internal audit will focus on processes that are critical to risk management and capital planning at the firms, areas of focus for CCAR.
The aim of these and additional measures is to make CCAR more the culmination of year-round supervision of risk-management and capital planning processes than a discrete exercise that takes place at the same time as the supervisory stress tests.
Finally, I would note that, to provide investors, counterparties, analysts, and the public with better information on the meaning of an objection on qualitative grounds to a capital distribution plan, we now release our decisions on each capital plan and, for firms whose capital plans were objected to, provide a summary of the specific reasons for those objections.15 
Although strong capital regulation is critical to ensuring the safety and soundness of our largest financial institutions, it is not a panacea, as indeed no single regulatory device can ever be.
Similarly, supervisory stress testing and CCAR, while central to ensuring strong capital positions for large firms, are not the only important elements of our supervisory program.
First, supervisory stress testing has fundamentally changed the way we think about capital adequacy.
The need to specify scenarios, loss estimates, and revenue assumptions--and to apply these specifications on a dynamic basis--has immeasurably advanced the regulation of capital adequacy and, thus, the safety and soundness of our financial system.
The opportunities it provides to incorporate macroprudential elements make it, in my judgment, the single most important advance in prudential regulation since the crisis.
Second, supervisory stress testing and CCAR have provided the first significant form of supervision conducted in a horizontal, coordinated fashion, affording a single view of an entire portfolio of institutions, as well as more data-rich insight into each institution individually.
As such, these programs have opened the way for similar supervisory activities and continue to teach us how to organize our supervisory efforts in order most effectively to safeguard firm soundness and financial stability.
Finally, supervisory stress testing and CCAR are the exemplary cases of how supervision that aspires to keep up with the dynamism of financial firms and financial markets must itself be composed of adaptive tools.
If regulators are to make the necessary adaptations, they must be open to the comments, critiques, and suggestions of those outside the regulatory community.
For this reason, transparency around the aims, assumptions, and methodologies of stress testing and our review of capital plans must be preserved and extended.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing (PDF)," final rule (Docket No.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2014 Summary Instructions and Guidance (Washington: Board of Governors, November 1) (PDF), p.
Prior to CCAR 2014, the Board sent CCAR participants a letter detailing the Federal Reserve'sprocedure for independently projecting the firms' balance sheets and risk-weighted assets in the supervisory stress test and the implications of the independent projections.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Federal Reserve Independent Balance Sheet and RWA Projections," December 16.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, 2014 Supervisory Scenarios for Annual Stress Tests Required under the Dodd-Frank Act Stress Testing Rules and the Capital Plan Rule (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, November 1), p.
See Bank for International Settlements (2012), Peer Review of Supervisory Authorities' Implementation of Stress Testing Principles (PDF) (Basel: BIS, April), p.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2014: Supervisory Stress Test Methodology and Results (Washington: Board of Governors, March) (PDF).
See Board of Governors, "Policy Statement on the Scenario Design Framework for Stress Testing," p.
See Board of Governors, Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test 2014, p.
The Dodd-Frank Act requires companies with between $10 and 50 billion in assets to conduct an annual company-run stress test.
The Federal Reserve does not conduct a CCAR-like exercise to evaluate these company-run stress tests, although we do review the firms' company-run stress tests and capital planning processes in the normal course of supervision.
This review is tailored to the smaller size, reduced complexity, and limited systemic risk of these firms.
14160, of Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2014), "Supervisory Guidance on Implementing Dodd-Frank Act Company-Run Stress Tests for Banking Organizations with Total Consolidated Assets of More Than $10 Billion but Less Than $50 Billion," final supervisory guidance (Docket No.
For other, smaller banking organizations--those with $10 billion or less in total consolidated assets--there is no supervisory expectation or regulatory requirement that these firms will conduct capital stress testing.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), Capital Planning at Large Bank Holding Companies: Supervisory Expectations and Range of Current Practice (Washington: Board of Governors, August) (PDF).
See Board of Governors, Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review 2014, p.

In my remarks this afternoon I will try to further the collaboration between corporate and financial law scholarship by suggesting how the nature of finance and financial regulation affects corporate governance and why, in turn, special corporate governance measures are needed as part of an effective prudential regulatory system.
First, it has long been recognized that the unique features of deposit-taking financial institutions raise the question whether generally applicable corporate law and governance principles are adequate.
Because banks are financial intermediaries that use deposits to provide much, if not most, of the funding for their lending, an insolvent bank may well be unable to satisfy all its deposit liabilities.
In the days before federal deposit insurance, the impracticality of contractual solutions to reduce the vulnerability of depositors led to a variant of normally applicable limited liability rules.
Many states enacted so-called double liability rules, whereby shareholders could be liable for the losses of a failed bank in an amount equal, and in addition, to their investment in the bank.
Presumably, these rules were intended to change the calculus of shareholders as to the risks they wished their banks to assume and, perhaps, the degree to which they monitored management.
Following the creation of federal deposit insurance, a series of constraints on normal corporate prerogatives has been applied to insured institutions, justified in large part by the need to counteract the resulting moral hazard and to protect the federal deposit insurance fund (DIF).
Bank charters have always differed from general corporate charters insofar as they grant special privileges and forbid certain activities by the chartered institutions.
Perhaps the most important of these today is the imposition of minimum capital requirements on all insured depository institutions and bank holding companies.
Second, there is a variety of ways in which the attributes of financial markets and financial regulation affect the capital market discipline assumed in much corporate governance theory and corporate law.
The prior point about the moral hazard associated with insured deposits implies that--at least in traditional, deposit-reliant banks--the kind of market discipline associated with the price of funding and creditor monitoring will be attenuated.
More generally, to the degree uninsured depositors or other bank creditors expect that they will be protected by the government in the event the bank encounters serious difficulties, those same features of market discipline will again be weakened.
This, of course, is the problem of moral hazard associated with too-big-to-fail perceptions, whereby investors or counterparties are willing to extend credit at prices that do not fully reflect the risk associated with the bank.2 
The market discipline traditionally associated with the market for corporate control is also affected by banking regulation and supervision.
These include an assessment of the adequacy of the financial resources of the firms, the "competence, experience, and integrity" of the officers and directors, and the impact of the acquisition on systemic risk.3 Moreover, of course, any firm that acquires a commercial bank must be a bank holding company, thereby subject to a range of activity restrictions and other regulatory requirements.
But, by screening out transactions that would result in unacceptable increases in risk, either to an institution or to the financial system as a whole, these provisions may in some cases unintentionally limit the salutary disciplining effect on boards and management of the market for corporate control.
All firms bear the risk that problems may unexpectedly arise because of, say, product flaws that were unknown to boards of directors and perhaps even senior management.
These risks have increased during the past 25 years, as many institutions have combined traditional lending activities with capital markets businesses that rely on other funding models.
Accordingly, judgments about risk appetite and control systems to manage risk must be effectively executed by senior management and overseen by the board.
This imperative, in turn, means that the information and monitoring processes and systems established for, or available to, boards of financial institutions may need to be more extensive than those in large, nonfinancial firms.
In the wake of the financial crisis, the public interest in regulation of banks and other financial firms is, I think it fair to say, both self-evident and substantial.
It seeks to protect the DIF by combatting what would otherwise be moral hazard and subsidized funding through capital requirements, activities restrictions, and other measures.
Because microprudential regulations were designed primarily to minimize losses to the DIF, they have traditionally focused on insured depository institutions (IDIs); the regulation of owners and affiliates of IDIs is essentially about ensuring that the activities and risks of those other entities do not threaten the IDIs themselves.
The financial crisis highlighted the need to supplement traditional microprudential regulation with a macroprudential approach oriented toward the well-being of the financial system as a whole.
Here there are two related objectives, both of which seek to avoid costs that failure or severe stress would impose on the economy beyond those suffered by shareholders of a financial firm.
One is protecting against systemic risk--for example, the risk that certain activities or the failure of a firm would result in very large negative externalities, either through a classic domino effect or through contagion effects producing a financial crisis.
Losses in a tail event are likely to be correlated for large firms deeply engaged in trading and relying on short-term wholesale funding.
This objective, long neglected in financial regulation, is prominently featured in post-crisis statutory, regulatory, and supervisory reforms.
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) explicitly establishes financial stability and the containment of systemic risk as the aim of dozens of new regulatory provisions.5 Thus, for example, any firm whose failure could pose systemic risk is subject to prudential regulation, quite apart from its relationship with IDIs.
A second objective of macroprudential regulation is to avoid a harmful contraction of credit availability in significant regions or sectors of the economy, even if there were little chance of a financial crisis.
This outcome could ensue were banks accounting for a material portion of credit extension simultaneously to come under solvency or funding pressures that caused them to pull back from lending.
The importance of both macroprudential objectives is that the regulatory framework should aim to reduce the chances of transmission of systemic risk by such firms to a greater extent than traditional, microprudential regulation would.
But even stipulating these crucial objectives, why should prudential regulation need to involve itself with corporate governance? After all, there are many important forms of regulation applicable to corporations.
A regulatory field may establish certain behavioral norms, require conformity with certain product or byproduct characteristics, or prohibit certain activities.
While some regulatory systems require certain procedures within the regulated entities--particularly as remedial measures following violations--few, if any, create specific and significant ongoing requirements for corporate decisionmaking or oversight.
Corporate and securities law may establish a duty of management and directors to limit regulatory violations, but the rationale for these duties is to protect shareholders from the consequences of regulatory violation, not directly to further the public regulatory objective.6 
The answer, I think, lies at least in part with the centrality and nature of risk in the activities of financial intermediaries.
Risk-taking--whether well- or ill-considered--is perhaps the central activity of all financial intermediaries.
Where those intermediaries are significantly leveraged and engaged in maturity transformation, the risk-taking carries substantial potential societal consequences beyond the possible losses to investors, counterparties, and employees of the financial firm.
Microprudential and macroprudential regulation each respond to this divergence between the private and social balances of costs and benefits associated with a given level of risk-taking by financial intermediaries.
The focus of microprudential regulation is on the distortions to funding costs that may arise when depositors or capital markets do not require the funds they provide fully to price in the risks assumed by banks in using those funds, whether because of federal deposit insurance or expectations of a government safety net.
The focus of macroprudential regulation is on the negative externalities that large financial firms can impose on the rest of the economy.
That is, while the public has an interest in healthy, profitable banks, and thus the interests of shareholders and the public overlap, they are not coincident.
Practically speaking, a financial institution more or less continually makes risk decisions, the circumstances of which can vary substantially over time, across asset classes, and even contemporaneously in a single asset class based on the differing circumstances of borrowers or counterparties.
Prudential rules can limit or prohibit certain bank activities that are thought to be particularly risky.
With respect to activities that are permitted, prudential regulation can indirectly influence corporate decisions on risk-taking by requiring minimum amounts of capital to be held by the regulated firms.
But, fundamental as they are to contemporary prudential regulation, capital requirements--particularly static, backward-looking standards--will necessarily be somewhat imprecisely related to the range of actual risk incident to specific assets or transactions within the various risk categories established by the capital regime.
In fact, the capital regime may itself invite arbitrage, as firms look to maximize risk-taking within regulatory risk categories.7 
Thus it is also important for prudential regulation to influence the processes of risk-taking within regulated financial firms as a complementary tool to capital requirements and other substantive measures.
This view is reflected in various banking laws, most notably in the Dodd-Frank Act requirement that all bank holding companies with $10 billion or more in assets have a risk committee, composed of independent directors and "responsible for the oversight of the enterprisewide risk management practices" of the firm.8 This provision in itself requires only that the bank holding companies have capable and independent risk committees that, by extension, should be overseeing well-developed risk-management practices and systems of controls in the firms.
It does not specify what the risk appetite of the firm should be.
However, its inclusion in section 165 of the Dodd-Frank Act, which requires an array of additional prudential measures directed at firms that could pose threats to financial stability, suggests that the risk-committee mandate has a prudential motivation.
Of course, good risk management is important for shareholders as well.
Regulatory prods for efficient management information systems and well-developed risk-assessment procedures should generally be welcomed by shareholders.
Similarly, regulatory insistence on capable and independent oversight of risk management is consonant with shareholder interests, which might be damaged by employees who exercise poor judgment or whose compensation structures may incentivize them to take risks not desirable for the firm as a whole.
The possible divergence of interests comes not in the architecture of risk management but in substantive decisions on risk appetite.
How, then, might corporate governance be changed to incorporate risk considerations consistent with micro- and macroprudential regulatory objectives? One way would be to broaden the fiduciary duties of boards and management.
The other, which has already been followed to some degree, is to apply regulatory and supervisory requirements to relevant corporate governance processes.
Of course, realization of the first approach would require either changes in state corporate law or amendments to federal securities or financial regulatory statutes.
I shall speak briefly to this possibility after describing some examples of the second approach already in place, along with some possibilities for further measures.
With no claim to comprehensiveness, let me suggest three kinds of regulatory and supervisory measures that can better align corporate governance of financial firms with regulatory objectives.
First, regulatory requirements can be directed at changing the incentives of those making decisions within a financial firm.
One good example is incentive compensation for senior managers and other bank employees with substantial decisionmaking authority.
Otherwise, managers who stand to suffer reputational or job loss as their firm declines or fails may have a more conservative risk appetite than diversified shareholders, who value the upside of risk-taking and whose limited liability makes them relatively less concerned with catastrophic downside possibilities.
As has been observed by numerous commentators,9 however, where these kinds of incentive compensation arrangements have succeeded in better aligning the interests of shareholders and employees, they intensify the conflict between shareholder and regulatory interests.10 Ironically, regulatory objectives match up better with the old-style managers for whom the preservation of the firm is considerably more important than for shareholders.
Some have proposed making incentive compensation packages more closely reflect the composition of the liability side of a banking organization's balance sheet by including returns on debt, as well as equity, instruments in the calculation of compensation.11 Others have proposed the much simpler approach of making a significant part of incentive compensation deferred and subject to clawback and forfeiture, with the employee's ultimate right to the compensation dependent on the firm not having become insolvent, received government assistance, or experienced a similar triggering event.
While developing the details of an effective mechanism that also allows for motivating employees to advance shareholder interests will take some work, some measure along these lines is key to adjusting incentives so as to promote prudential objectives across the many risk decisions made within the firm.
Incentive realignment can also be achieved by fostering more of the capital market discipline that has, as explained earlier, been limited.
One example is a byproduct of measures to increase the total loss absorbency of systemically important financial firms by requiring minimum amounts of debt that could be converted to equity upon a firm's insolvency.
As you may know, the Federal Reserve Board intends to issue a proposed rulemaking that would implement such a requirement at the largest financial firms.
While the principal motivation of such a requirement is to help ensure that even a very large financial firm can be resolved in an orderly fashion without the injection of public capital, identifying debt instruments as convertible to equity in a context where resolution is a credible option should make the price of those instruments especially sensitive to the relative risk of failure of those firms.
Requiring systemically important financial firms to issue a meaningful amount of long-term debt would indirectly influence corporate governance by introducing at-risk debt holders as a constituency whose concerns management must monitor and address.
A second kind of measure to align corporate governance at financial firms more closely to regulatory objectives is a substantive requirement or constraint upon decisions made within the firm.
As a practical matter, it would be hard to develop a rule setting a comprehensive risk appetite consonant with regulatory objectives.
However, there are regulatory requirements that can serve as partial surrogates for such a rule.
A good example, already in place, is a feature of the Federal Reserve's program of stress testing and capital planning.
A firm may not make capital distributions (whether in the form of dividends or capital repurchases) that would, when added to losses under hypothesized adverse scenarios as projected in our annual supervisory stress test, reduce the firm's capital below certain minimum levels.
When we adopted this rule several years ago, we were criticized by some for encroaching on the prerogative of boards of directors of financial firms to decide on capital distribution policies, in accordance with general corporate governance practice.
After all, banking regulators are not only permitted, but obliged, to set minimum capital requirements at banking organizations and other systemically important financial firms.
Limiting capital distributions is, conceptually, no different from requiring a firm to build capital in the first place.12 A regulation designed to maintain minimum capital levels in large banking organizations in a projected period of stress is consistent with the macroprudential objectives discussed earlier.
Indeed, these requirements counteract the practices seen at some banks in the run-up to the financial crisis, whereby boards of directors continued to return capital to shareholders even as conditions deteriorated severely.13 Tying capital levels to corporate governance decisions about capital distributions simply recognizes that capital levels and capital distributions are two sides of the same coin.
A third kind of measure seeks to affect the institutions and processes of corporate governance, rather than directly to change incentive structures or regulate decisions.
Many possible actions of this sort would really be efforts to improve the risk-assessment and risk-management capacities of management and boards, rather than to focus specifically on the divergence between shareholder and regulatory interests with respect to risk appetite.
An effective system of controls is important both to shareholders and to regulators.
Thus, for instance, the considerable and continuing emphasis we have placed on firms developing and maintaining effective management information systems makes risk assessment work better for shareholders, even as it facilitates supervisory oversight.
With respect to the institutional features of board oversight of risk management, there is also substantial overlap in the interests of shareholders and regulators.
For example, both shareholders and supervisors should expect a board to include members with the expertise, experience, and time commitment that are appropriate to risk management of the kinds of activities in which the financial firm engages.
Of particular interest are three board positions--the nonexecutive chair or lead director, the head of the risk committee, and the head of the audit committee.
More generally, shareholders and supervisors must have confidence that globally active institutions with hundreds of thousands of employees have audit and risk committees with the practical ability to provide effective oversight of risk decisions.14 I might note in passing that regular discussion between board members and supervisors can also serve the interests of shareholders, since supervisors may have an informed perspective on the firm's operations that enables boards better to fulfill their strategic and risk-oversight functions.
Supervisors should also expect a well-conceived process for board review of major firm decisions, which will nearly always carry some implications for risk management and risk appetite.
In practical terms, such a process would connect decisions on strategy, risk-appetite setting, and capital planning.
Neither we nor shareholders should be comfortable with a process in which strategic decisions are made in one silo, risk-appetite setting in another, and capital planning in yet a third, with the convergence of these efforts coming together only when it is too late for each to affect the other, or for the board to be able to exercise effective oversight.
There are many important regulatory requirements applicable to large financial firms.
But it has perhaps become a little too reflexive a reaction on the part of regulators to jump from the observation that a regulation is important to the conclusion that the board must certify compliance through its own processes.
We should probably be somewhat more selective in creating the regulatory checklist for board compliance and regular consideration.
One example, drawn from Federal Reserve practice, is the recent supervisory guidance requiring that every notice of a "Matter Requiring Attention" (MRA) issued by supervisors must be reviewed, and compliance signed off, by the board of directors.15 There are some MRAs that clearly should come to the board's attention, but the failure to discriminate among them is almost surely distracting from strategic and risk-related analyses and oversight by boards.
One might ask how the strengthening of systems of controls and risk-appetite decision processes can promote achievement of regulatory interests beyond those shared with the owners of firms.
One answer is that it clearly improves the supervisory line-of-sight into the safety and soundness of financial firms.
The more timely and accurate the information that can be aggregated by supervisors, the more responsive our supervisory and financial stability oversight can be.
A well-developed set of risk and control functions also allows an effective point of entry for pursuing certain regulatory objectives.
To date, the best example of this potential is our annual supervisory stress tests and Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) to which I have already referred.
As a substantive matter, the CCAR requirements limit capital distributions of large financial institutions based upon a forward-looking assessment of the losses that would be suffered under hypothetical adverse economic scenarios, so that capital will be built and maintained at levels high enough for the firms to remain viable financial intermediaries even under such stressed conditions.
In addition to the microprudential improvement that comes from substituting a dynamic for a static capital calculation, there is an important macroprudential motivation, reflected in the design of scenarios and the required levels of post-stress capital.
Beyond this important, but discrete regulatory measure, well-developed processes for determining risk appetite give supervisors better insight into risks specific to the activities and strategic decisions of each firm.
This, in turn, should permit more timely supervisory or regulatory responses.
The regulatory focus on risk in corporate governance will produce additional examples of each of the three kinds of measures I have just described.
For instance, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency has recently proposed guidance for risk governance at large national banks.16 Still, particularly with an audience half composed of corporate law professors, it is natural to ask whether corporate law tools might usefully supplement regulatory measures.
Specifically, the question arises as to whether the fiduciary duties of the boards of regulated financial firms should be modified to reflect what I have characterized as regulatory objectives.
Doing so might make the boards of financial firms responsive to the broader interests implicated by their risk-taking decisions even where regulatory and supervisory measures had not anticipated or addressed a particular issue.
A more contemporary variant on these ideas was offered a little over a decade ago by Jon Macey and Maureen O'Hara, who proposed expanded fiduciary duties for directors of insured banks, including giving bank creditors the right to sue for violations of these duties.17 In a provocative recent paper, John Armour and Jeff Gordon suggest that the duties of directors of systemically important financial institutions should be modified precisely because diversified shareholders have a strong interest in avoiding risk decisions by these institutions that increase systemic risk.18 Their analysis implies that the customary tension between regulatory and diversified shareholders' interests may be considerably mitigated in the case of systemically important firms whose failure could result in financial turbulence and consequent economic loss for the entire economy.
Obviously, any such changes in corporate law are beyond the authority of the Federal Reserve.
I mention them in the hope and anticipation that corporate law scholars will continue to evaluate such ideas, since whatever one's eventual conclusions on their desirability, the analytic process is sure to yield further insights into the key question of how best to respond to the points of divergence between shareholder and regulatory interests in risk-taking by large financial firms.
In the wake of the financial crisis, the changes in finance, in financial regulation, and in the relationship among government agencies that carry out prudential regulation have created any number of opportunities for financial law scholars to collaborate with their colleagues in other disciplines--from administrative law to constitutional law to bankruptcy law.
This collaboration is perhaps natural, since major shocks to the economy, and thus the country, have in the past occasioned legal changes whose implications reached far beyond the original area of reform.
Roe (2004), "The Institutions of Corporate Governance," in Claude Menard and Mary M.
Useful reviews of corporate governance in financial institutions, reflecting lessons learned from the financial crisis, include Hamid Mehran and Lindsay Mollineaux (2012), "Corporate Governance of Financial Institutions (PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No.
539 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, February); Hamid Mehran, Alan Morrison, and Joel Shapiro (2011), "Corporate Governance and Banks: What Have We Learned from the Financial Crisis? (PDF)" Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No.
502 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, June); Moonrad Choudhry (2010), "Effective Bank Corporate Governance: Observations from the Market Crash and Recommendations for Policy," Journal of Applied Finance & Banking, vol.
The Bank Merger Act requires consideration of a roughly comparable set of factors.
Acquisitions are also subject to special scrutiny where an acquiring firm has less-than-satisfactory supervisory ratings.
Tarullo (2014), "Rethinking the Aims of Prudential Regulation," speech delivered at Bank Structure Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, May 8; Daniel K.
Tarullo (2014), "A Macroprudential Perspective on Regulating Large Financial Institutions (PDF)," in Banque de France, Financial Stability Review, no.
Some of the more important of these provisions are discussed in Daniel K.
Tarullo (2012), "Financial Stability Regulation," speech delivered at the Distinguished Jurist Lecture, University of Pennsylvania Law School, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, October 10.
Of course, strong capital requirements also build a loss absorption buffer that is useful in dealing with risks gone bad ex post, even if they cannot entirely contain those risks ex ante.
This provision further requires that the risk committee include "at least one risk management expert having experience in identifying, assessing, and managing risk exposures of large, complex firms." Return to text
Stulz (2010), The Squam Lake Report: Fixing the Financial System (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Indeed, if the incentives are powerful enough, they may give employees a greater risk appetite than even diversified shareholders are presumed to have.
See Bebchuk and Spamann, "Regulating Bankers' Pay." Depending on how closely one would want to tie compensation to the prices of bonds, for example, there may be difficulties owing to the potential at times for interest rate risk fluctuations to overwhelm credit risk fluctuations in the price of debt instruments.
Interest rate risk fluctuations would not reflect the performance or risk associated with a specific firm.
Indeed, insured depository institutions are prohibited by statute from making any capital distribution that would render the firm undercapitalized.
Beverly Hirtle (2014), "Bank Holding Company Dividends and Repurchases during the Financial Crisis," Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report No.
666 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March).
There have also been proposals that boards of large financial firms have a small staff, independent of management, who can help the board sift through the often voluminous materials delivered by management to foster informed inquiries of management and decisions on risk appetite.
For example, a proposal for a "dedicated secretariat" was offered by a parliamentary committee in the United Kingdom.
An MRA is a supervisory finding that the Federal Reserve communicates to the firm and requires remediation.
For more information, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation (2013), "Supervisory Considerations for the Communication of Supervisory Findings," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 13-13 (June 17).
Department of the Treasury, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (2014), Guidelines Establishing Heightened Standards for Certain Large Insured National Banks, Insured Federal Savings Associations, and Insured Federal Branches; Integration of Regulations, 79 Fed.
Macey and Maureen O'Hara (2003), "The Corporate Governance of Banks," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, vol.

At the 2014 Spring Membership Meeting, Institute for International Finance, London, United Kingdom
I should say at the outset that the views that I offer are my own and not necessarily those of any other member of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).
My view is that forward guidance has generally been effective in providing support for the economy at a time when the federal funds rate has been pinned at its effective lower bound.
The FOMC has provided various forms of forward guidance since 2009, both for rate policy and for asset purchases.
In my view, forward rate guidance has helped reduce medium and longer-term interest rates, and by doing so has provided meaningful support for the economy.
First, by increasing public understanding and market confidence in the path of rates, guidance has helped reduce term premiums.
Second, by communicating that rates would remain lower for longer than market participants might otherwise have expected, guidance has lowered medium- and longer-term rates through the expectations channel.
Finally, even when guidance has initially been well aligned with market expectations, it has reduced the likelihood that rate expectations will subsequently shift upward in ways that the Committee does not intend.
Event studies as well as market-implied quotes and surveys corroborate the view that guidance has reduced medium- and longer-term interest rates and has held down volatility as well.
To be sure, there have also been times when forward guidance and market expectations have diverged, with resulting spikes in volatility.
Such situations may be difficult to avoid, given the use of new, unconventional policy tools, although we always try to communicate policy as clearly as possible.
Our forward guidance has evolved over time--from qualitative, to date-based, to quantitative guidance, and from largely unconditional to state-contingent guidance explaining how the Committee will react to future economic outcomes.
In March 2009, the Committee offered the qualitative guidance that it expected to hold the federal funds rate near zero "for an extended period."1 In August 2011, the Committee moved to date-based guidance, saying that it expected to hold the rate near zero at least until mid-2013.2 In December 2012, the Committee adopted quantitative thresholds that were explicitly tied to future economic conditions.
In particular, it stated its intention to hold the policy rate near zero "at least as long as the unemployment rate remains above 6-1/2 percent, inflation between one and two years ahead is projected to be no more than a half percentage point above the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and longer-term inflation expectations continue to be well anchored."3 
More recently, at the March 2014 FOMC meeting, as the 6-1/2 percent unemployment threshold approached, the Committee offered new guidance that contained qualitative and time-based elements but retained the state-contingent nature of the threshold guidance.
First, the Committee said that, in determining how long to hold the federal funds rate near zero, it "will assess progress--both realized and expected--toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation"; it also indicated that, in making this assessment, it would take into account a wide range of information, "including measures of labor market conditions, indicators of inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and readings on financial developments."4 
Second, the Committee indicated, "based on its assessment of these factors, that it likely will be appropriate to maintain the current target range for the federal funds rate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends"--a time-based reference, since the Committee has indicated that it expects to wind down its asset purchases by the end of this year if the economy continues to evolve as expected.5 Of course, the actual timing of liftoff will depend on the performance of the economy.
Third, the Committee stated that it "anticipates that, even after employment and inflation are near mandate-consistent levels, economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping the target federal funds rate below levels the Committee views as normal in the longer run."6 Committee members have differing thoughts on why that may be the case.
In my view, the reasons would include the lingering effects of the financial crisis, including lower potential growth for a time.
Turning briefly to asset purchases, since last December's FOMC meeting, the Committee has reduced asset purchases in a series of measured steps from a pace of $85 billion a month to its current pace of $45 billion per month.
If incoming information continues to broadly support the Committee's expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-run objective, these measured steps would continue and asset purchases would come to an end in the fourth quarter of this year.
Market expectations seem to be well aligned with this guidance.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2009), "FOMC Statement," press release, March 18, paragraph 3.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "FOMC Statement," press release, August 9.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 12, paragraph 5.
The thresholds provided a useful guide to policy, but with the unemployment rate approaching its 6‑1/2 percent threshold, the Committee judged that it would need to look at a broader range of information in order to determine the appropriate stance of policy.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, March 19, paragraph 5.

Life will continue to be a journey of discovery if you tend the fires of curiosity that burn brightly in all of us.
A second tool for lifelong intellectual growth is a willingness to listen carefully to others.
My Federal Reserve colleagues and I experienced this as we struggled to address a financial and economic crisis that threatened the global economy.
We brainstormed and designed a host of programs to unclog the plumbing of the financial system and to keep credit flowing.
I learned the lesson during this period that one's response to the inevitable setbacks matters as much as the balance of victories and defeats.
One aspect of grit that I think is particularly important is the willingness to take a stand when circumstances demand it.
To stabilize the financial system and restore economic growth, he took courageous actions that were unprecedented in ambition and scope.
When I first came to the Federal Reserve 37 years ago, I was struck by the passion of my colleagues for the mission of the Fed.
You are completing one important phase of your life today and embarking on an amazing new adventure.

Thank you, Administrator Contreras-Sweet, I am pleased to be at the U.S.
I am also grateful to be able to share a few thoughts on the important role I believe small businesses have played and will continue to play in America's recovery from the financial crisis and the Great Recession.

After the onset of the crisis, the Federal Reserve took extraordinary steps to stabilize the financial system and halt the plunge in economic activity.
Since then, the Fed has continued to use its monetary policy tools to promote the recovery and make progress toward our mandated objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
By putting downward pressure on interest rates, the Fed is trying to make financial conditions more accommodative--supporting asset values and lower borrowing costs for households and businesses and thus encouraging the spending that spurs job creation and a stronger recovery.
The Federal Reserve tries to promote the conditions to foster job creation, but, overwhelmingly, it is businesses that create the jobs.
About 85 percent of nonfarm employment is in the private sector, which traditionally is the source of a similarly large share of new jobs during economic expansions.
So far during this expansion, public-sector employment has declined and the private sector has accounted for all of the net increase in employment, so businesses have been even more crucial to job creation than usual.
According to the latest data from the Labor Department, a little more than half of the net number of jobs created since employment began growing in 2010 has been generated by firms with fewer than 250 employees, and most of that amount was accounted for by firms with fewer than 50 employees.1 
One of the reasons I wanted so much to be here this evening was to be able to acknowledge these important contributions.
America has come a long way since the dark days of the financial crisis, and small businesses deserve a considerable share of the credit for the investment and hiring that have brought that progress.
Although we have come far, it is also true that we have further to go to achieve a healthy economy, and I am certain that small businesses will continue to play a critical role in reaching that objective.
You come from different places and have achieved success in a wide variety of ways, but you all share the entrepreneurial spirit that has always been central to our nation's prosperity.
We at the Federal Reserve are keenly aware of your vital role, and we pledge to continue to do our part in promoting the recovery so that you can continue to help America grow and prosper.
See Bureau of Labor Statistics (2014), "Business Employment Dynamics: Third Quarter 2013," press release, April 29.

At the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Bank Structure Conference, Chicago, Illinois
Among the questions posed by the organizers of this 50th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition is how the "regulatory-supervisory framework has fundamentally changed." I think one answer is that the aims and scope of prudential regulation have been fundamentally redefined since the financial crisis.
Most significantly, a concern with financial stability and an increased emphasis on macroprudential regulation have informed major changes in both banking law and supervision.
This salutary shift in perspective has important implications for prudential regulation.
One is that prudential regulation must deal with threats to financial stability whether or not those threats emanate from traditional banking organizations.
Hence the need to broaden the perimeter of prudential regulation, both to certain nonbank financial institutions and to certain activities by all financial actors.
By specifying these aims with more precision, we can shape both a more effective regulatory system and a more efficient one.
That is, once we have specified the regulatory aims for a particular type of financial institution, we can more effectively rationalize and, as appropriate, differentiate the rules and requirements to be applied to each kind of institution.
An introductory chapter on the history and purposes of bank regulation revealed a complicated set of issues concerning changes in the structure and activities of banks, which, among other things, suggested that the rationales for regulating banks might vary depending on the size, business model, and affiliations of a bank.
Yet the remaining chapters of the casebooks treated bank regulation as a more or less unitary endeavor--with prudential rules applicable in about the same way to the activities and affiliations of all banking organizations, and only to banking organizations.
To be sure, topics such as bank affiliations with nonbank financial institutions were, for practical reasons, more focused on larger banks.
And there were a few measures directed at the more complicated balance sheets of larger banks, such as the Basel II internal ratings-based (IRB) approach to regulatory capital, although there was no evidence the underlying purpose of capital regulation differed.
But in all the chapters elaborating applicable doctrine and rules, there was little hint that the purposes and principles of bank regulation might vary across the bank population.
And, to the extent that nonbank financial institutions such as broker-dealers, investment companies, or insurance companies were covered, the pedagogical point seemed to be that the aims of regulating these kinds of firms were dominantly investor and customer protection--not prudential considerations such as limiting moral hazard, much less fostering financial stability.
The reason for this disconnect was, to a great extent, that pre-crisis statutes and regulations reflected what I have termed a unitary approach to banking regulation.
The core of banking regulation could be explained with a relatively simple narrative, by which deposit insurance and access to the discount window had been granted to depository institutions in order to forestall runs and panics.
The resulting moral hazard and the use of insured deposits as a funding source for these institutions justified everything from capital requirements to limitations on banks getting into nonbanking businesses.
Even when traditional banks were permitted to affiliate with other kinds of financial firms, laws such as the Bank Holding Company Act1 and section 23A of the Federal Reserve Act2 were oriented mostly toward protecting the insured depository institution and the federal deposit insurance fund (DIF) from possible depredation by those nonbank businesses.
Of course, banking law had not only tried to protect the DIF from the risky activities of banks and their affiliates.
It had also, albeit far less explicitly, tried to protect banks from nonbank competition and, to some degree, from each other.3 Just as banks were supposed to stick to their knitting--the business of banking--so everyone else was supposed to stay out of that business.
But as we all know, the distinction between demand for commercial bank loans and for investment bank underwriting of public debt issuance was never absolute, and in the 1970s it began to erode more rapidly with the growth of capital markets and financial innovations such as money market funds.
The financial crisis has confirmed that the pre-crisis regulatory structure reflected a view of the financial system that was at once too broad and too narrow.
It was too broad in that prudential rules generally applied to all banks and bank holding companies through a microprudential approach focused on the soundness of each individual bank.
The rules were implemented somewhat differently, based on the size and relative complexity of banking organizations, and separate supervisory portfolios were created.
But the principles informing regulation were basically the same whether the institution was a community bank or a holding company with a $1 trillion balance sheet whose failure might shake the entire financial system.
The prudential regulatory structure was too narrow in that it did not extend to firms and activities outside of banking organizations, even those that could pose a threat to financial stability, because the soundness of the federal deposit insurance system was not implicated.
Thus Lehman Brothers, whose failure did seriously shake the financial system, was not subject to even the microprudential standards applicable to bank holding companies.
The run on the repo market involved a wide range of market actors of different sizes, operating under different regulatory constraints.
It is important to recognize that the statutory and administrative changes in regulation following the financial crisis were not only about strengthening existing regulation following 30 years of largely deregulatory measures that had preceded the crisis.
The turmoil that attended the collapse of several large nonbank financial institutions, and the extraordinary government measures necessary to contain that turmoil, had quickly changed into a consensus--previously the minority view--that prudential regulation should be broadened to better safeguard the financial system as a whole.
This perspective was embraced by Congress in the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank), which directed federal banking and market regulators to add to their existing mandates the responsibility for protecting financial stability.
One regulatory innovation in Dodd-Frank that is particularly salient for present purposes was the creation of different categories of banking organizations--largely, but not exclusively, on the basis of total assets--to which different regulatory requirements are to apply.
Most prominently, section 165 requires that "in order to prevent or mitigate risks to the financial stability of the United States," the Federal Reserve Board is to establish for all bank holding companies with at least $50 billion in assets prudential standards that "are more stringent" than generally applicable standards and that "increase in stringency" based on a variety of factors related to the systemic importance of these institutions.4 These standards must cover capital, liquidity, risk management, resolution planning, and concentration limits; the Federal Reserve may add other standards as it finds appropriate.5 Section 165 also establishes requirements for the establishment of a risk committee and for stress testing, but these are applicable in at least some respects to all bank holding companies with at least $10 billion in assets.
In implementing the section 165 requirement of increasing stringency for enhanced prudential standards applicable to banking organizations of increasing systemic importance, the Federal Reserve has essentially created several categories within the universe of banking organizations with $50 billion or more in assets.
All firms in this universe will be subject to the basic enhanced standards, including supervisory stress tests, capital plan submissions, resolution plan requirements, single counterparty credit limits, and a modified form of the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) requirement that was part of Basel III.
Firms with at least $250 billion in assets or $10 billion in on-balance-sheet foreign assets are also subject to the advanced approach risk-based capital requirements of Basel II, the Basel III supplementary leverage ratio, the full LCR requirement, and the countercyclical capital buffer provision of Basel III.6 The eight U.S.
firms designated as global systemically important banks will be additionally subject to risk-based capital surcharges, the enhanced Basel III supplementary leverage ratio, tighter single counterparty credit limits, and a long-term debt requirement designed to support the effectiveness of orderly resolution processes.
In addition, the supervision of these firms is overseen by the Large Institution Supervision Coordinating Committee (LISCC), an inter-disciplinary group created by the Federal Reserve Board in 2010.7 
Thus, there are regulatory categories for banks with $10 billion or more in assets, with $50 billion in assets, with either $250 billion in assets or $10 billion in foreign assets, and with a combination of large asset holdings and other characteristics that have resulted in their being designated of global systemic importance.
In fact, Dodd-Frank creates another category of banks in making its provision on incentive compensation applicable to banking organizations with at least $1 billion in assets.
Clearly, the unitary approach of the pre-crisis period has been abandoned.
But in terms of differentiating regulatory aims, Dodd-Frank really identifies only one additional objective--that of preventing or mitigating risks to U.S.
By developing this objective a bit more, and by introducing other salient considerations, we may be able to specify the varying aims of regulation for different kinds of banks in a manner that helps us rationalize applicable regulatory structures.
Let me begin with what I regard as relatively straightforward cases in specifying regulatory aims--those of the very largest banking organizations and of small ones.
The largest, of course, have commanded enormous attention, with too-big-to-fail concerns often dominating the public debate on regulatory reform in the aftermath of the financial crisis.
There is now a consensus among banking authorities, both U.S.
and foreign, that the failure of financial institutions of sufficient combined size, interconnectedness, and leverage could threaten the entire financial system, and, therefore, must be subject to a stricter regulatory regime.
The special regulatory aims for such institutions should reflect this systemic focus.
As the financial crisis showed, losses in a tail event are likely to be correlated for large firms deeply engaged in trading, structured products, and other capital market instruments, and relying on similar sources of short-term funding.
Thus, the regulatory framework should aim to reduce the chances of distress or failure at such firms to a greater extent than traditional, microprudential regulation would.
Moreover, it should explicitly take into account the correlations and inter-dependencies in asset holdings and funding.
Finally, the regulatory system should aim to offset the perception of too-big-to-fail status, which carries with it the possibility of funding advantages in normal times, and protection of creditors and perhaps even shareholders in highly stressed times.
The systemic perspective and consequent aim of protecting financial stability argue for the stronger and broader regulatory measures that have been undertaken in recent years.
At the other end of the spectrum are community banks, conventionally defined as those with less than $10 billion in assets.
The roughly 5,700 banks in this group constitute 98 percent of insured commercial banks in the United States, but hold just under 20 percent of the aggregate assets of all commercial banks.
Indeed, 90 percent of community banks are what supervisors classify as "small" community banks--those with less than $1 billion in assets.
While these banks will suffer the fallout from systemic problems, they are unlikely to cause such problems.
The regulatory aim, therefore, is about as close as can be to the traditional microprudential bank regulatory aims of protecting the federal DIF and limiting the use of insured deposits by restricting the scope of bank activities.
It is true that the relative lack of geographic and portfolio diversification in many community banks can make them vulnerable to localized economic problems.
banks that have assets of $10 billion or more, but are not among the eight large, complex institutions that have been designated of global systemic importance? Obviously they vary enormously in size, from just over $10 billion in assets all the way up to very large regional banks with hundreds of billions in assets.
Yet, whatever their size, most banking organizations in this group are overwhelmingly recognizable as traditional commercial banks (though a few do have significant capital market or other activities).
It is with this similarity in mind that some executives of some pretty sizable banks have described their institutions to me as essentially a community bank, but with a bigger balance sheet.
But there are at least two reasons why the aims for prudential regulation of such institutions might reach beyond conventional microprudential purposes.
First, some at the higher end of this range may have a large enough systemic footprint that their stress or failure could have material effects on the rest of the financial system, though less than the LISCC firms.
If a number of these banks simultaneously came under pressure or failed, a harmful contraction of credit availability in significant regions or sectors of the economy could ensue, even if there were little chance of a financial crisis.
Of course, I would not lump all 80 of these institutions into the same category for purposes of specifying the aims of regulation.
In particular, only a small fraction of these firms have a significant enough systemic footprint that their stress or failure would impose sizable negative externalities on the rest of the financial system.
And the lines delineating the possible categories are not as easy to draw as for community banks and LISCC firms.
The preceding observations have portrayed the prudential regulatory framework as one that should be constructed with different aims in mind.
With respect to banks of a certain size--even those predominantly involved in conventional lending activities--a macroprudential aim should be added.
Finally, with respect to banking organizations of such size and complexity that serious stress or failure could pose risks to the entire financial system, a financial stability aim should be the basis for additional forms of regulation.
Let me now give a few examples of how specifying these aims can help us think through ways in which the current overlays of regulatory and supervisory requirements might be rationalized.
In part, such a rationalization is motivated by the familiar goal of limiting regulatory costs that are not necessary to achieve a given set of regulatory aims, thereby lowering the cost of the underlying economic activity.
But it is also motivated by the advantage to be gained if supervisory resources can be deployed where their payoff in achieving well-specified regulatory aims will be highest.
Community bankers often argue that they are subject to a range of rules and requirements that are not really necessary given the relevant regulatory aim which, as previously suggested, is quite straightforward.
That regulatory aim needs to be implemented with an eye to the context in which community banks operate.
One obvious point of context is that any regulatory requirement is likely to be disproportionately costly for community banks, since the fixed costs associated with compliance must be spread over a smaller base of assets.
A second important point of context is the business model of community banks.
As is well-known, over the past few decades they have substantially reduced their presence in lines of business such as consumer lending in the face of competition from larger banks benefiting from economies of scale.
Today, as a group, their most important forms of lending are to small- and medium-sized businesses.
Smaller community banks--those with less than $1 billion in assets--account for nearly a quarter of commercial and industrial lending, and nearly 40 percent of commercial real estate lending, to small- and medium-sized businesses, despite their having less than 10 percent of total commercial banking assets.
This state of affairs is not surprising when one considers that credit extension to smaller firms is an area in which the relationship lending model of community banks retains a comparative advantage.
It means that community banks are of special significance to local economies.
It also means that, particularly in rural areas, the disappearance of community banks could augur a permanent falloff in this kind of credit, at least a portion of which may not be maintained in the more standardized approach to lending characteristic of larger banks.
Banking regulators have taken a number of steps to try to avoid unnecessary regulatory costs for community banks, such as fashioning simpler compliance requirements and identifying which provisions of new regulations are of relevance to smaller banks.
But a number of new statutory provisions apply explicitly to some smaller banks or, by failing to exclude any banks from coverage, apply to all banks.
This means that smaller banks do need to expend at least some compliance effort.
And, even where regulatory frameworks try to place a lesser burden on smaller banks, there may be some risk of "supervisory trickle down," whereby supervisors informally, and perhaps not wholly intentionally, create compliance expectations for smaller banks that resemble expectations created for larger institutions.
It would be worthwhile to have a policy discussion of statutes that might be amended explicitly to exclude community banks (which, again, are generally defined as those with less than $10 billion in assets) from their coverage.
The concerns addressed by these statutory provisions are substantially greater at larger institutions and, even where a practice at a smaller bank might raise concerns, the supervisory process remains available to address what would likely be unusual circumstances.
Indeed, relieving both banks and supervisors of the need to focus on formal compliance with a range of regulations less relevant to community bank practice would free them to focus on the actual problems that may exist at smaller banks.
As I have already suggested, financial stability and macroprudential aims do not apply equally to all 80 of the banks in this wide category of firms holding over $10 billion in assets, other than the LISCC banking organizations.
While it is reasonable to adopt a macroprudential aim for all firms in this category, few of these banks have the kind of systemic footprint that would warrant extensive special regulation for financial stability purposes.
In establishing requirements for firm (though not supervisory) stress testing and risk-management committees for all bank holding companies in this group, but mandating that only bank holding companies of $50 billion or more be subject to enhanced prudential standards, Congress has reflected a similar judgment.
Experience to date suggests to me, at least, that the line might better be drawn at a higher asset level--$100 billion, perhaps.
Requirements such as resolution planning and the quite elaborate requirements of our supervisory stress testing process do not seem to me to be necessary for banks between $50 billion and $100 billion in assets.
If the line were redrawn at a higher figure, we might explore simpler methods for promoting macroprudential aims with respect to banks above $10 billion in assets but below the new threshold.
Were such a change to be adopted, bank holding companies with less than $100 billion in assets would not be subject to any of the enhanced prudential requirements of section 165 of Dodd-Frank; bank holding companies with assets between $100 billion and $250 billion would be subject to supervisory stress testing and a basic set of the section 165 requirements; and holding companies with $250 billion or more in assets would be subject to the supplementary leverage ratio, the full LCR, and the countercyclical capital buffer provision.
Of course, this is not the only way to draw the lines, and there could be reasons for applying additional requirements to specific banks, even if they fall below the presumptive asset threshold.
Specifying prudential regulatory aims in the context of community and middle-range banks suggests a rationalization that could possibly eliminate certain requirements as they apply to some of these banks.
These include capital surcharges and minimum amounts of "gone concern" loss absorbing capacity, among others.
Most important is continued work on the vulnerabilities posed by short-term wholesale funding and, more generally, by large trading books, including maturity matched books of securities financing transactions.
The regulatory response to these vulnerabilities will likely require some combination of measures directed at capital, liquidity requirements, and resolution procedures.
There is also a need for a complementary set of measures such as minimum margining requirements applicable to all securities financing transactions, whether or not they involve systemically important firms.
While necessary new rules will now be applied to these institutions, vestiges of the pre-crisis regulatory approach that did not rest on well-specified regulatory aims are still in place and might sensibly be modified or removed.
Most prominent in this regard is the Basel II IRB approach for risk-weighted capital requirements.
The IRB approach, which generally applies in the United States to all bank holding companies with $250 billion or more in assets, was developed a decade ago in an effort to align risk weightings more closely to the increasingly sophisticated quantitative risk-assessment techniques in the financial industry.
At the time of its development, the IRB approach seemed intended to result in a modest decline in risk-weighted capital requirements, a goal that the financial crisis revealed to be badly misguided.
But even with the higher capital ratios required by Basel III, the IRB approach is problematic.
The combined complexity and opacity of risk weights generated by each banking organization for purposes of its regulatory capital requirement create manifold risks of gaming, mistake, and monitoring difficulty.
The IRB approach contributes little to market understanding of large banks' balance sheets, and thus fails to strengthen market discipline.
And the relatively short, backward-looking basis for generating risk weights makes the resulting capital standards likely to be excessively pro-cyclical and insufficiently sensitive to tail risk.
That is, the IRB approach--for all its complexity and expense--does not do a very good job of advancing the financial stability and macroprudential aims of prudential regulation.
Yet a capital measure that incorporates these aims is precisely what is needed to complement the traditional microprudential elements of our capital standards.
The supervisory stress tests developed by the Federal Reserve over the past five years provide a much better risk-sensitive basis for setting minimum capital requirements.
They are based on adverse scenarios that would affect the entire economy and take correlated asset holdings into account.
As we gain experience, we have been enhancing the macroprudential features of the annual stress test exercise.
And, of course, the disclosure of the results helps inform counterparties and investors, thereby increasing market discipline.
They are undoubtedly a substantial amount of work for both the banks and supervisors but, unlike the IRB approach, the benefits seem worth the work.8 
For all these reasons, I believe we should consider discarding the IRB approach to risk-weighted capital requirements.
With the Collins Amendment9 providing a standardized, statutory floor for risk-based capital; the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio providing a stronger back-up capital measure; and the stress tests providing a better risk-sensitive measure that incorporates a macroprudential dimension, the IRB approach has little useful role to play.
We would continue to expect that firms practice sound quantitative risk management using internal models and other techniques.
Indeed, the qualitative assessment included in our annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR) exercise is designed to ensure that the firms have this capacity.
But, in light of all that has happened in the last decade, I see little reason to maintain the requirements of the IRB approach for our largest banks.
Of course, the IRB approach was agreed internationally as part of the Basel II framework concluded in 2004.
It would be best if all the Basel Committee countries moved together to adopt standardized risk-weighted and supervisory stress testing requirements for all internationally active banks.
This would be a somewhat complicated shift for a number of reasons, including the likely appropriateness of applying different adverse scenarios for different parts of the world and the challenges in conducting a peer review at the Basel Committee of supervisory stress tests by member countries.
Yet, as documented by the Basel Committee's work on divergence in risk weightings by banks applying IRB methods, Basel II created its own problems of consistency and transparency.
There is no reason to believe that the task of creating an oversight and review framework for supervisory stress testing would be any more difficult.
In practical terms, the unitary approach to banking regulation has been supplanted by various statutory, regulatory, and supervisory responses to the financial crisis.
In particular, the aim of protecting financial stability has figured prominently in those responses, though a broader macroprudential aim can be detected as well.
I have tried today to suggest that an explicit effort to specify relevant aims as they pertain to different kinds of banking organizations can provide a basis for rationalizing applicable regulatory frameworks--sometimes by paring back or foregoing regulation for certain kinds of firms, and sometimes by adding a regulatory measure where the relevant aim has not been adequately promoted by existing measures.
By design and necessity, I have offered only a handful of illustrations as to how this perspective might lead to certain regulatory changes.
I look forward to debate on the merits of these, and other, possible implications of a more precise specification of prudential regulatory aims.
I also look forward to seeing new editions of banking law casebooks that differentiate regulatory measures with an eye to these multiple aims and their differential application to various banking organizations.

Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, as amended, 12 U.S.C.
Section 23A limits transactions between insured depository institutions and their corporate affiliates.
Section 165 of Dodd-Frank also requires that these special prudential standards apply to any nonbank financial company designated as systemically important by the Financial Stability Oversight Council.
Dodd-Frank also uses the $50 billion threshold in other parts of the law, such as to define the universe of firms that must pay the Federal Reserve for the cost of examination and supervision, and that are subject to ex post assessments in the event that taxpayers were to bear any loss as a result of the resolution of a firm under Title II of the law.
It was a pre-existing regulatory category created to identify the firms subject to the so-called advanced approaches risk-based capital requirements of Basel II.
For more on LISCC, including which firms are part of the LISCC portfolio, see www.federalreserve.gov/bankinforeg/large-institution-supervision.htm.
Under the Federal Reserve's Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review program, bank holding companies participating in the supervisory stress tests must demonstrate their capacity for sound quantitative risk assessment and management, but not for purposes of setting regulatory capital requirements.
Section 171 of Dodd-Frank, popularly known as the Collins Amendment, requires that the federal banking agencies establish minimum consolidated capital requirements for all banking organizations that are not less than "generally applicable" risk-based capital requirements.

Last month I announced that I would be leaving the Federal Reserve Board at the end of May in order to return to my teaching position at Harvard.
So I would like to take a moment to express my gratitude to my many colleagues at the Board and around the Federal Reserve System who have taught me so much--not just about economic policy, but about public service.
One of the many aspects of the job that I had not fully appreciated before joining the Board is how challenging the whole process of communicating about monetary policy can be.
As you know, over the past several years the Federal Reserve has dramatically altered how it talks to financial markets and to the public at large.
The title of Marvin Goodfriend's 1986 paper captured the situation well: "Monetary Mystique: Secrecy and Central Banking."2 In the 1990s, however, the Fed began to move toward greater transparency, with the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) providing more timely information about its policy decisions.
And, in the last 10 years, there have been numerous changes in the FOMC's communications policies: accelerated release of the minutes, an increase in the frequency and scope of participants' economic projections, and the introduction of postmeeting news conferences, to name a few.
These are all welcome developments, and I expect there will be further changes down the road, as the Committee keeps trying to improve how it explains its policy decisions to the public.
In this spirit, I would like to spend the rest of my time discussing a few of the things that make life interesting for those trying to communicate clearly and effectively about monetary policy.
More specifically, I am going to touch on three factors that strike me as particularly relevant for our efforts in this area: the fact that the market is not a single person, the fact that the Committee is not a single person either, and the delicate interplay between the Committee and the market.
This point was very nicely made by Hyun Shin in his remarks at the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City's symposium at Jackson Hole last summer.
Market prices are outcomes of the interaction of many actors, and not the beliefs of any one actor....But most discussions of central bank forward guidance treat the market as if it were an individual that you can sit down and reason with....By doing so, I believe we are in danger of committing a category mistake where we anthropomorphize the "market" as a rational individual with beliefs.3 
Clearly, a significant chunk of the move came in response to comments made during this interval by Chairman Bernanke about the future of our asset purchase program.
And if the subsequent data remain broadly aligned with our current expectations for the economy, we would continue to reduce the pace of purchases in measured steps through the first half of next year, ending purchases around midyear.4 
Perhaps it is not surprising that news about the future course of the asset purchase program would have a strong effect on markets.
But here is the striking fact: According to the Survey of Primary Dealers conducted by the New York Fed, there was hardly any change over this period in the expectation of the median respondent as to the ultimate size of the program.5 Chairman Bernanke's comments may have clarified the FOMC's intentions, but, according to the survey, they did not have any clear directional implications for the total amount of accommodation to be provided via asset purchases.
So what gives? One hypothesis is that going into the May-June period, there was a wide divergence of opinion among market participants as to the future of the asset purchase program.
And, crucially, in asset markets, it is often the beliefs of the most optimistic investors--rather than those of the moderates--that drive prices, as they are the ones most willing to take large positions based on their beliefs.
In this setting, a piece of monetary policy communication that merely "clarifies" things--that is, one that delivers the median market expectation but truncates some of the more extreme possibilities--can have powerful effects.
To be clear, I am not saying that monetary policy communications should have been different during this period.
Rather, the point is that in some circumstances there are very real limits to what even the most careful and deliberate communications strategy can do to temper market volatility.
This is just the nature of the beast when dealing with speculative markets, and to suggest otherwise--to suggest that, say, "good communication" alone can engineer a completely smooth exit from a period of extraordinary policy accommodation--is to create an unrealistic expectation.
In this spirit, I think the FOMC may face a similar communications challenge as the nature of the forward guidance for the path of short-term interest rates evolves over the next couple of years.
The 6.5 percent unemployment threshold that we had until recently was not only quantitative in nature, but it also represented a relatively firm commitment on the part of the Committee.
While this kind of commitment was entirely appropriate at the zero lower bound, as policy eventually normalizes, guidance will necessarily take a different form; it will be both more qualitative as well as less deterministic.
So, for example, when I fill in my "dot" for 2016 in the Survey of Economic Projections, I think of myself as writing down not a commitment for where the federal funds rate will be at that time, but only my best forecast, and one that is highly uncertain at that.
Monetary policy will be geared to evolving conditions in the economy, and the public does need to understand that as those views evolve, the Committee's views on policy will likely evolve with them.
And that's a kind of uncertainty that the Committee wouldn't want to eliminate completely from its guidance because we want the policy we put in place to be appropriate to the economic conditions that will prevail years down the road.7 
I agree completely with this view, and I suspect that many in the market also understand the distinction that is being drawn--that as policy normalizes, forward guidance will be less commitment-like and, hence, a less precise guide to our future actions than it has been in the recent past.
But I would not want to presume that everybody is thinking about it the same way; one can imagine that there might again be some optimists who are in this case underestimating the degree of uncertainty about the future path of policy and are placing levered bets accordingly.
However, even if all of the individual members of the Committee have well-defined and carefully thought-out individual reaction functions--that is, each member knows what his or her policy preference is for any given state of the world--it does not follow that the Committee as a whole has an equally well-defined reaction function.
So it may be easier and more efficient to leave our behavior in some important contingencies for future discussions.
This observation is helpful in understanding some of the differences between an open-ended asset purchase program, such as QE3, and its closed-end predecessors.
One advantage of going with an open-ended approach is that when we rolled out QE3 in September 2012, we were able to make a forceful statement that we would continue with asset purchases until we observed, as Chairman Bernanke put it in his postmeeting press conference, a "substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market."8 We were able to do so even though I suspect that, had we tried to put a number to it, there would have been considerable disagreement among Committee members as to the exact meaning of "substantial improvement." So in this case, leaving the Committee's reaction function incompletely worked out allowed us to move forward with a major policy initiative in a timely manner, which otherwise might have been very difficult.
Of course, the flip side of this reaction-function incompleteness is that it becomes harder for the Committee to precisely communicate its future intentions to the market--in part because these future intentions have not yet been fully fleshed out.
Going further, it is important to note that this evolution of the reaction function does not happen in a vacuum, where the Committee deliberates in a cloistered fashion and then simply reports its decisions to the market.
All along, the market is making conjectures about how we will behave, and these conjectures in turn can have a powerful influence on the debate itself.
This feedback effect has been especially relevant in the case of QE3, because the policy has relied significantly on a signaling channel for some of its effectiveness.
That is, QE3 has, in my view, mattered not just because of the direct downward pressure on longer-term interest rates associated with removing a given quantity of duration from the private market, but also because it has buttressed our forward guidance by serving as a credible signal of the Committee's intentions with respect to the future path of the federal funds rate.
Of course, if the Committee is using asset purchases to signal its policy intentions, then the information content of purchase decisions depends importantly on what the public expects it to do.
For example, if it is early 2013 and the market has somehow arrived at the belief that the Committee will continue buying assets at an $85 billion per month clip so long as monthly payroll growth does not exceed 200,000 jobs per month for three months in a row, then even a small cut down to $80 billion per month is likely to elicit a powerful market reaction--not because the $5 billion cut is consequential in and of itself, but because of the message it sends about the Committee's policy leanings more generally.
But then you can see the feedback loop that arises: The more strongly the market becomes attached to this belief--even if it was initially somewhat arbitrary--the more wary the Committee must be of making an unexpected change, and this wariness further reinforces the market's initial belief.
In this sense, the Committee's reaction function for the appropriate quantity of asset purchases under the QE3 program is not only evolving over time, it is coevolving along with the market's beliefs.
In part for this reason, I believe we are currently in a very good position with respect to the market's expectations for our asset purchases going forward.
Market participants now appear to almost uniformly expect that, barring a material change in the outlook for the economy, the Committee is likely to continue tapering our purchases in further measured steps over the remainder of this year.
With these expectations in place, the execution of the taper itself becomes much easier, as we no longer have to worry about a step-down at each meeting sending a potentially misleading message about our intentions with respect to the future path of the federal funds rate.9 
The case of QE3 illustrates the point that the Committee's reaction function is shaped by market expectations and vice versa.
Consider the well-known phenomenon of "gradualism" in monetary policy, whereby changes to the policy rate during an easing or tightening cycle tend to come in a series of small and relatively predictable steps.
This phenomenon is reflected in the fact that the Committee's behavior in normal times can be approximately described by an "inertial" version of a Taylor rule--one in which, in addition to putting weight on inflation and unemployment, the Committee also behaves as if it has an aversion to making sudden large changes in the federal funds rate.
Why should the Committee act as if it is averse to making sharp changes in the funds rate? At one level, the answer is clear: This behavior is in the service of our mandate, and nothing more.
For if we were to make an unexpectedly abrupt adjustment at any time, it would likely have a large effect on long-term rates and credit conditions more generally, which in turn might compromise our ability to reach our goals for employment and inflation--for example, a large bond-market move of this sort might nip a nascent recovery in the bud, which is why it is to be avoided.
Digging deeper, though, it is important to recognize that part of the reason that the bond market would react so strongly to a sharp change in the short-term policy rate is that we have settled into a self-sustaining equilibrium in which the Fed tends to act gradually, and the market has come to expect that gradualism.
In other words, the market has learned that a given increase in the federal funds rate at the beginning of a tightening cycle is typically followed by many more moves in the same direction, so there is naturally a multiplier effect on long-term rates of a given change in short-term rates.
Thus, an expectation of gradualism on the part of the market makes it all the more important for the Fed to adjust the policy rate gradually, thereby fulfilling the market's beliefs.
But what, if any, are its normative implications? On the one hand, as I have emphasized, a gradualist approach to monetary policy is likely to be the best way for us to deliver on our mandate at any point in time, taking as given the market's expectations for Fed behavior.
As such, it would probably not make sense, in the short run, for the Committee to deviate from this approach--with an unprepared market, the result might well be an undesirable degree of market turbulence, with attendant negative effects on the real economy.
In particular, it is interesting to think about an alternative long-run equilibrium in which the Fed has somehow developed a reputation for worrying less about the immediate bond-market effect of its actions and is known to react more aggressively to changes in economic conditions.10 In this alternative equilibrium, the market would expect the Fed to behave in a less gradualist fashion, so any given move in the funds rate would have a smaller multiplier effect on long rates.
Thus, it is possible that in this alternative world, market volatility would be no higher than it is in our world, but the Fed would nevertheless be able to adjust policy more nimbly when it needed to.
There is always a temptation for the central bank to speak in a whisper, because anything that gets said reverberates so loudly in markets.
But the softer it talks, the more the market leans in to hear better and, thus, the more the whisper gets amplified.
So efforts to overly manage the market volatility associated with our communications may ultimately be self-defeating.

The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
See Marvin Goodfriend (1986), "Monetary Mystique: Secrecy and Central Banking," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
Hall, 'The Routes into and out of the Zero Lower Bound,'" speech delivered at "Global Dimensions of Unconventional Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 22-24, pp.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Transcript of Chairman Bernanke's Press Conference (PDF)," June 19, p.
For example, between the April and July 2013 dealer surveys, the respondents' distributions of the size of the System Open Market Account portfolio at the end of 2014 actually increased somewhat.
See the responses to question 10 on the April survey and question 8 on the July survey; the survey results are available on the Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), "Transcript of Chair Yellen's Press Conference (PDF)," March 19, pp.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Transcript of Chairman Bernanke's Press Conference (PDF)," September 13, p.
However, any deviation from the pattern of measured steps that the Committee has been taking would now likely be seen as a highly informative signal, which is something that the Committee would need to take into account in responding to changes in the outlook.
There is a close connection between this time-consistency problem and the well-known one that central banks face in trading off inflation and unemployment.
With respect to the latter, Kenneth Rogoff has argued that one can achieve a better outcome with a "conservative" central banker who places a higher weight on controlling inflation than does society as a whole.
In the current context, the analogy would be that one may be able to achieve a better outcome with a central banker who places a lower weight on the intermediate objective of not roiling the bond market.
See Kenneth Rogoff (1985), "The Optimal Degree of Commitment to an Intermediate Monetary Target," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.

At the Independent Community Bankers of America 2014 Washington Policy Summit, Washington, D.C.
I am pleased to have this opportunity to share my views on some of the key issues facing community banks and how I see the community banking model fitting into the financial system in the years ahead.
In particular, I will discuss steps the Federal Reserve has taken to address the "too-big-to-fail" problem and how these steps affect community banks; I will describe how the Fed strives to improve our understanding of the unique role that community banks play in the economy; and then I'll show how we are using this knowledge to better tailor our supervisory expectations and approaches to community banks.
As you may know, before I rejoined the Federal Reserve Board as Vice Chair in 2010, I had the privilege of serving for six years as president and chief executive of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
The 12th district is the largest of the Fed's districts, covering nine western states, and it is home to a significant number of community banks, the majority of which are supervised by the San Francisco Fed directly or indirectly through bank holding companies.
Community bankers helped me, when I served as president, to take the pulse of the local economy and also to understand how regulatory and policy decisions in Washington affect financial institutions of different sizes and types, sometimes in very different ways.
During the financial crisis, I saw firsthand the challenges that community banks faced in a crisis they did little to cause, and I have felt strongly ever since that the Fed must do what it can to ensure that the actions taken following the crisis do not place undue burdens on your institutions.
I believe a healthy financial system relies on institutions of different sizes performing a variety of functions and serving different needs.
In some communities, your banks are actually situated on Main Street, but all community banks serve Main Street by providing credit to small business owners, homebuyers, households, and farmers.
Because of their important role, I am pleased that the condition of many community banks has been improving.
Although there is still considerable revenue pressure from low margins, earnings for most community banks have rebounded since the financial crisis.
Asset quality and capital ratios continue to improve, and the number of problem banks continues to decline.
Notably, after several years of reduced lending following the recession, we are starting to see slow but steady loan growth at community banks.
While this expansion in lending must be prudent, on balance I consider this growth an encouraging sign of an improving economy.
Let me begin by discussing an issue that I know has been on the minds of many community bankers: how policymakers are addressing the problem of banks that are perceived to be too big to fail.1 Community banks share the interest we all have in reducing the systemic risk posed by firms that are large, complex, and interconnected, and also in reducing any potential competitive advantages that such firms may enjoy as a result of too-big-to-fail.
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act (Dodd-Frank Act) addresses the too-big-to-fail issue through steps intended to limit both the likelihood that systemically important firms would fail and the potential damage from any that do.
The Federal Reserve and the other financial regulatory agencies have issued a number of regulations to implement the requirements set forth in the legislation and to enhance the supervision of the largest financial firms.
But even before Dodd-Frank became law, the Federal Reserve began to strengthen its oversight of the largest, most complex banking firms and require these firms to materially improve their capital adequacy.
For example, in 2009, we conducted the first stress tests of the largest 19 U.S.
That test has subsequently evolved into our annual Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review, known as CCAR, which requires all bank holding companies with total assets of $50 billion or more to submit annual capital plans for review by the Federal Reserve.
CCAR helps ensure that the largest banking organizations will have enough capital to continue operating through times of economic and financial stress.2 To be clear, as the federal banking agencies have stated previously, these stress testing and capital planning requirements do not, and should not, apply to community banks.3 
In addition to strengthening requirements for stress testing and capital planning, the agencies have also strengthened capital requirements for the largest firms by approving more robust risk-based and leverage capital requirements.
Because the financial crisis demonstrated the importance of having adequate levels of high-quality capital at banks of all sizes, many elements of the revised capital framework apply to all banking organizations.
In designing the revised capital rules, however, the agencies considered financial stability risks and adjusted the final rules to make the requirements substantially more rigorous for the largest, most systemically important banking organizations than for community banks.4 
Because the failure of a systemic institution could impose significant costs on the financial system and the economy, the Board recently finalized a requirement for the eight large, globally systemic banks to meet a significantly higher leverage requirement than other banking organizations.
And we are working to implement risk-based capital surcharges for these systemically important firms.
We also need to ensure that the new rules are embedded in our supervision of the largest firms; and, we must continue to watch for emerging sources of systemic risk and take steps as appropriate to address these risks.
One such risk that the Federal Reserve has been monitoring closely is the reliance of some firms on potentially volatile short-term wholesale funding.5 We are carefully considering the systemic vulnerabilities that may be posed by overreliance on short-term wholesale funding and are weighing potential policy responses.
While it would be premature to indicate whether or how we might address these vulnerabilities, I can say that few, if any, community banks are reliant on levels of short-term wholesale funding that could raise concerns about systemic risk, and regulators would carefully consider the ramifications of any action, including the effect on community banks.
In carefully considering how our actions affect community banks, the Federal Reserve is committed to understanding your institutions and the challenges you face.
We continue to try to improve that understanding in two important ways--research and outreach.
The Fed is uniquely positioned to employ these two methods because of our traditional strength as a research institution and because of our structure, with Reserve Banks that have deep roots in communities in every region of the country.
In the past several years, research staff across the Federal Reserve System who were independently exploring issues related to community banking have developed an informal network to share findings and identify areas for further research.
After some of the fruits of this effort were shared with the Board, we decided to join with the Conference of State Bank Supervisors (CSBS) to host a research and policy conference focused on community banks.
This conference, "Community Banking in the 21st Century," was held in October 2013 at the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
Louis.6 It was one of very few research conferences to focus specifically on community banks and also brought together researchers, community bankers, policymakers, and bank supervisors to discuss the practical implications of the papers presented.
Among the topics that researchers addressed in their papers were the link between bank failures and local economic performance,7 the role of management in the performance of community banks,8 and the impact of Dodd-Frank on community banks.9 I'm pleased to say that the conference was so successful that the Federal Reserve and CSBS are planning another in September.10 
In addition to research, our understanding of community banks is enhanced by the Fed's outreach to community bankers.
At the most basic level, supervisory staff at each Reserve Bank gain insights from their regular contact with community bankers.
Additional knowledge comes by way of community outreach initiatives, which provide the added benefit of informing the Fed about local economic conditions.
Here in Washington, in addition to participating in events like this one, the Board of Governors meets twice a year with the Community Depository Institutions Advisory Council (CDIAC).11 The council, which includes representatives from small banks, credit unions, and savings associations from each Federal Reserve district, provides information about economic conditions around the country and those issues that are of greatest concern to community institutions.
In addition, we have been taking steps to improve our communication with community bankers.
In that regard, we have been using various platforms to go beyond formal policy issuances and better explain our supervisory expectations for community banks.
We have also developed and continue to enhance our industry training efforts.
In particular, we have developed two programs--Ask the Fed and Outlook Live--that have become quite popular with community bankers who are interested in learning more about topics that are of importance to both banks and supervisors.
Ask the Fed is a program for officials of state member banks, bank and thrift holding companies, and state bank commissioners.
Outlook Live, which is a companion program to the Federal Reserve's quarterly Consumer Compliance Outlook publication, is a webinar series on consumer compliance issues that is led by Federal Reserve staff.12 
We are also now using periodic newsletters and other communication tools to highlight information that community bankers may be interested in knowing and to provide information on how examiners will assess compliance with Federal Reserve policies.
In addition to Consumer Compliance Outlook, in 2012 the Federal Reserve System established a Community Banking Connections website and quarterly newsletter to focus on safety-and-soundness issues that are of practical interest to community bankers and bank board members.13 The Federal Reserve also launched a series of special-purpose publications called FedLinks.14 These publications highlight key elements of specific supervisory topics and discuss how examiners will typically address the topic.
The common goal for all of these outreach efforts is building and sustaining an ongoing dialogue with community bankers.
One theme that has come through loud and clear in this outreach is concern about regulatory burden.
The financial crisis has prompted significant changes to regulation, so the Federal Reserve understands this concern and strives to minimize regulatory burden for all institutions, including community banks.
At the same time, we are taking a fresh look at how we supervise community banks and possible ways that supervision can be smarter, more nimble, and more effective.
In that regard, and consistent with my earlier points about too big to fail, we know that a one-size-fits-all approach to supervision is often not appropriate.
In recent years, we have taken a number of actions to tailor supervisory expectations to the size and complexity of the banking organizations we supervise.
The first step is taking a disciplined approach to judging which supervisory policies should apply to community banking organizations.
This involves not only weighing the costs and benefits of proposed rules and their implementation, but in some cases also asking whether it makes sense for a specific policy to apply to community banks.
In other cases, it may not make sense to exclude community banking organizations entirely from the scope of a supervisory policy, but we may be able to scale expectations to the size and complexity of the supervisory portfolio, to minimize the burden where possible and appropriate.
The final capital rules for community banks that I mentioned earlier illustrate this kind of tailoring.
Let me turn now to upcoming changes in the accounting standard for credit losses on loans and securities.
We have heard the concern that overly complex accounting rules in this area would increase costs with little benefit for the users of community bank financial statements.
We are working with the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) to help ensure that the new standard, which is an important component of financial reform efforts, can be implemented in a reasonable and practical way for community banks.
We have stressed to FASB that its proposal should not require community banks to utilize complex modeling processes.
We expect that a final standard will permit loss-estimation techniques that build upon current credit-risk management techniques used by community banks.15 We will work with community banks to help implement the new standard when it is final.
In addition, our supervisory guidance will emphasize that regulatory expectations for implementation of the standard will differ based on bank size and complexity.
For example, we are currently in the process of developing and adopting common technology tools across the Federal Reserve System that should allow our examiners to more effectively focus their time and enhance the consistency of our examination processes nationwide.
Furthermore, we are exploring ways that our community bank examiners may be able to complete more examination work off site.
For example, for banks that have electronic loan files, examiners may be able to read these files off site rather than on the bank premises.
We are also seeking ways to utilize the financial information that we collect from banks to tailor the examination procedures that are used on site, with less work being required at institutions with lower risk profiles.
We recently adopted a new consumer compliance examination framework for community banks.16 Under this new program, our consumer compliance examiners base examination intensity more explicitly on the individual community bank's risk profile, weighed against the effectiveness of the bank's compliance controls.
We expect that examiners will spend less time on low-risk compliance issues at community banks, increasing the efficiency of our supervision and reducing regulatory burden on many community banks.
Much of the work to tailor our supervisory requirements and programs is being overseen by the community bank subcommittee of the Board's Committee on Bank Supervision.
This subcommittee oversees the supervision of community and regional banks and reviews proposed supervisory policies to help ensure that they are appropriate for, and tailored to, community banks.
This subcommittee was formed several years ago under the direction of now former governors Betsy Duke and Sarah Bloom Raskin, and I want to assure you that the subcommittee will continue to play an important role in helping ensure that our supervisory policies make sense for community banks.
I should also add that we are working closely with our colleagues at the state level to help ensure that our supervisory approaches and methodologies are as consistent as possible.
In closing, let me repeat my strong belief that community banks will continue to play an important role in our financial system in the years ahead, serving the credit needs of the communities they are a part of and know so well.
The Federal Reserve will continue to promote a stronger and more resilient financial system, while carefully considering the effects of our actions on community banks and tailoring supervision appropriately.
This topic has been addressed in greater detail in previous speeches by Federal Reserve governors, including Daniel K.
Tarullo (2013), "Evaluating Progress in Regulatory Reforms to Promote Financial Stability," speech delivered at the Peterson Institute for International Economics, Washington, May 3; Jerome H.
Powell (2013), "Ending ‘Too Big to Fail,'" speech delivered at the Institute of International Bankers 2013 Washington Conference, Washington, March 4; and Janet L.
Perspective," speech delivered at the International Monetary Conference, Shanghai, June 3.
The results of the 2014 CCAR exercise are available on the Federal Reserve's website.
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), "Federal Reserve Releases Results of Comprehensive Capital Analysis and Review (CCAR)," press release, March 26.
Pursuant to the Dodd-Frank Act, the Federal Reserve and the other federal banking agencies require banking organizations with total consolidated assets between $10 billion and $50 billion to conduct annual company-run stress tests.
The agencies recently published guidance to clarify supervisory expectations for these firms.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (Board of Governors), Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC), and Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) (2014), "Agencies Issue Final Dodd-Frank Act Stress Test Guidance for Medium-Sized Firms," press release, March 5.
Board of Governors (2012), "Agencies Clarify Supervisory Expectations for Stress Testing by Community Banks," press release, May 14.
To help non-complex community banking organizations better understand the new capital rule, the agencies published a guide that summarizes changes to the capital rules for exposures commonly held by such organizations.
See Board of Governors, FDIC, and OCC (2013), New Capital Rule: Community Bank Guide (PDF) (Washington: Board of Governors, FDIC, and OCC, July).
Tarullo (2013), "Shadow Banking and Systemic Risk Regulation," speech delivered at the Americans for Financial Reform and Economic Policy Institute Conference, Washington, November 22; and Daniel K.
Tarullo (2013), "Macroprudential Regulation," speech delivered at the Yale Law School Conference on Challenges in Global Financial Services, New Haven, CT, September 20.
Powell (2013), "Community Banking: Connecting Research and Policy," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve/Conference of State Bank Supervisors Community Banking Research Conference, St.
John Kandrac (2013), "Bank Failure, Relationship Lending, and Local Economic Performance (PDF)," paper presented at the Federal Reserve/Conference of State Bank Supervisors Community Banking Research Conference, St.
Prager (2013), "Performance of Community Banks in Good Times and Bad Times: Does Management Matter? (PDF)" (preliminary draft), paper presented at the Federal Reserve/Conference of State Bank Supervisors Community Banking Research Conference, St.
Norman (2013), "The Impact of Dodd-Frank on Community Banks (PDF)," paper presented at the Federal Reserve/Conference of State Bank Supervisors Community Banking Research Conference, St.
Board of Governors, Division of Consumer and Community Affairs (2013), "Community Bank Risk-Focused Consumer Compliance Supervision Program," Consumer Affairs Letter CA 13-19 (November 18); and "Consumer Compliance and Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) Examination Frequency Policy," Consumer Affairs Letter CA 13-20 (November 18).

At the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York
While the housing market still has far to go, it seems to have turned a corner.
It is a sign of how far the economy has come that a return to full employment is, for the first time since the crisis, in the medium-term outlooks of many forecasters.
Today I will discuss how my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and I view the state of the economy and how this view is likely to shape our efforts to promote a return to maximum employment in a context of price stability.
I will start with the FOMC's outlook, which foresees a gradual return over the next two to three years of economic conditions consistent with its mandate.
While monetary policy discussions naturally begin with a baseline outlook, the path of the economy is uncertain, and effective policy must respond to significant unexpected twists and turns the economy may take.
My primary focus today will be on how the FOMC's monetary policy framework has evolved to best support the recovery through those twists and turns, and what this framework is likely to imply as the recovery progresses.
The FOMC's current outlook for continued, moderate growth is little changed from last fall.
The continued improvement in labor market conditions has been important in this judgment.
The unemployment rate, at 6.7 percent, has fallen three-tenths of 1 percentage point since late last year.
Broader measures of unemployment that include workers marginally attached to the labor force and those working part time for economic reasons have fallen a bit more than the headline unemployment rate, and labor force participation, which had been falling, has ticked up this year.
Inflation, as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures, has slowed from an annual rate of about 2-1/2 percent in early 2012 to less than 1 percent in February of this year.1 This rate is well below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run objective.
To some extent, the low rate of inflation seems due to influences that are likely to be temporary, including a deceleration in consumer energy prices and outright declines in core import prices in recent quarters.
We anticipate that, as the effects of transitory factors subside and as labor market gains continue, inflation will gradually move back toward 2 percent.
In sum, the central tendency of FOMC participant projections for the unemployment rate at the end of 2016 is 5.2 to 5.6 percent, and for inflation the central tendency is 1.7 to 2 percent.2 If this forecast was to become reality, the economy would be approaching what my colleagues and I view as maximum employment and price stability for the first time in nearly a decade.
Of course, if the economy obediently followed our forecasts, the job of central bankers would be a lot easier and their speeches would be a lot shorter.
Alas, the economy is often not so compliant, so I will ask your indulgence for a few more minutes.
Because the course of the economy is uncertain, monetary policymakers need to carefully watch for signs that it is diverging from the baseline outlook and then respond in a systematic way.
Let me turn first to monitoring and discuss three questions I believe are likely to loom large in the FOMC's ongoing assessment of where we are on the path back to maximum employment and price stability.
The first question concerns the extent of slack in the labor market.
One of the FOMC's objectives is to promote a return to maximum employment, but exactly what conditions are consistent with maximum employment can be difficult to assess.
Thus far in the recovery and to this day, there is little question that the economy has remained far from maximum employment, so measurement difficulties were not our focus.
But as the attainment of our maximum employment goal draws nearer, it will be necessary for the FOMC to form a more nuanced judgment about when the recovery of the labor market will be materially complete.
As the FOMC's statement on longer-term goals and policy strategy emphasizes, these judgments are inherently uncertain and must be based on a wide range of indicators.3 
I will refer to the shortfall in employment relative to its mandate-consistent level as labor market slack, and there are a number of different indicators of this slack.
At 6.7 percent, it is now slightly more than 1 percentage point above the 5.2 to 5.6 percent central tendency of the Committee's projections for the longer-run normal unemployment rate.
Other data suggest that there may be more slack in labor markets than indicated by the unemployment rate.
Similarly, while the share of workers in the labor force who are unemployed and have been looking for work for more than six months has fallen from its peak in 2010, it remains as high as any time prior to the Great Recession.5 There is ongoing debate about why long-term unemployment remains so high and the degree to which it might decline in a more robust economy.
As I argued more fully in a recent speech, I believe that long-term unemployment might fall appreciably if economic conditions were stronger.6 
The low level of labor force participation may also signal additional slack that is not reflected in the headline unemployment rate.
Participation would be expected to fall because of the aging of the population, but the decline steepened in the recovery.
Although economists differ over what share of those currently outside the labor market might join or rejoin the labor force in a stronger economy, my own view is that some portion of the decline in participation likely represents labor market slack.7 
Lastly, economists also look to wage pressures to signal a tightening labor market.
At present, wage gains continue to proceed at a historically slow pace in this recovery, with few signs of a broad-based acceleration.
As the extent of slack we see today diminishes, however, the FOMC will need to monitor these and other labor market indicators closely to judge how much slack remains and, therefore, how accommodative monetary policy should be.
A second question that is likely to figure heavily in our assessment of the recovery is whether inflation is moving back toward the FOMC's 2 percent longer-run objective, as envisioned in our baseline outlook.
As the most recent FOMC statement emphasizes, inflation persistently below 2 percent could pose risks to economic performance.
The FOMC strives to avoid inflation slipping too far below its 2 percent objective because, at very low inflation rates, adverse economic developments could more easily push the economy into deflation.
The limited historical experience with deflation shows that, once it starts, deflation can become entrenched and associated with prolonged periods of very weak economic performance.8 
A persistent bout of very low inflation carries other risks as well.
With the federal funds rate currently near its lower limit, lower inflation translates into a higher real value for the federal funds rate, limiting the capacity of monetary policy to support the economy.9 Further, with longer-term inflation expectations anchored near 2 percent in recent years, persistent inflation well below this expected value increases the real burden of debt for households and firms, which may put a drag on economic activity.
I will mention two considerations that will be important in assessing whether inflation is likely to move back to 2 percent as the economy recovers.
First, we anticipate that, as labor market slack diminishes, it will exert less of a drag on inflation.
We must therefore watch carefully to see whether diminishing slack is helping return inflation to our objective.10 Second, our baseline projection rests on the view that inflation expectations will remain well anchored near 2 percent and provide a natural pull back to that level.
But the strength of that pull in the unprecedented conditions we continue to face is something we must continue to assess.
Finally, the FOMC is well aware that inflation could also threaten to rise substantially above 2 percent.
At present, I rate the chances of this happening as significantly below the chances of inflation persisting below 2 percent, but we must always be prepared to respond to such unexpected outcomes, which leads us to my third question.
Myriad factors continuously buffet the economy, so the Committee must always be asking, "What factors may be pushing the recovery off track?" For example, over the nearly 5 years of the recovery, the economy has been affected by greater-than-expected fiscal drag in the United States and by spillovers from the sovereign debt and banking problems of some euro-area countries.
Further, our baseline outlook has changed as we have learned about the degree of structural damage to the economy wrought by the crisis and the subsequent pace of healing.
The emergency lending programs that the Federal Reserve implemented at the height of the crisis had been largely wound down, and the Fed was soon to complete its first large-scale asset purchase program.
Private-sector forecasters polled in the April 2010 Blue Chip survey were predicting that the unemployment rate would fall steadily to 8.6 percent in the final quarter of 2011.11 
This forecast proved quite accurate--the unemployment rate averaged 8.6 percent in the fourth quarter of 2011.
In April 2010, Blue Chip forecasters not only expected falling unemployment, they also expected the FOMC to soon begin raising the federal funds rate.
Indeed, they expected the federal funds rate to reach 1.3 percent by the second quarter of 2011.12 By July 2010, however, with growth disappointing and the FOMC expressing concerns about softening in both growth and inflation, the Blue Chip forecast of the federal funds rate in mid-2011 had fallen to 0.8 percent, and by October the forecasters expected that the rate would remain in the range of 0 to 25 basis points throughout 2011, as turned out to be the case.13 Not only did expectations of policy tightening recede, the FOMC also initiated a new $600 billion asset purchase program in November 2010.
Thus, while the reductions in the unemployment rate through 2011 were roughly as forecast in early 2010, this improvement only came about with the FOMC providing a considerably higher level of accommodation than originally anticipated.
In April 2011, Blue Chip forecasters expected the unemployment rate to fall to 7.9 percent by the fourth quarter of 2012, with the FOMC expected to have already raised the federal funds rate to near 1 percent by mid-2012.14 
As it turned out, the unemployment rate forecast was once more remarkably accurate, but again this was associated with considerably more accommodation than anticipated.
In response to signs of slowing economic activity, in August 2011 the FOMC for the first time expressed its forward guidance in terms of the calendar, stating that conditions would likely warrant exceptionally low levels for the federal funds rate at least through mid-2013.
The following month, the Committee added to accommodation by adopting a new balance sheet policy known as the maturity extension program.
Thus, in both 2011 and 2012, the unemployment rate actually declined by about as much as had been forecast the previous year, but only after unexpected weakness prompted additional accommodative steps by the Federal Reserve.
In both cases, I believe that the FOMC's decision to respond to signs of weakness with significant additional accommodation played an important role in helping to keep the projected labor market recovery on track.16 These episodes illustrate what I described earlier as a vital aspect of effective monetary policymaking: monitor the economy for signs that events are unfolding in a materially different manner than expected and adjust policy in response in a systematic manner.
Now I will turn from the task of monitoring to the policy response.
Fundamental to modern thinking on central banking is the idea that monetary policy is more effective when the public better understands and anticipates how the central bank will respond to evolving economic conditions.
Specifically, it is important for the central bank to make clear how it will adjust its policy stance in response to unforeseen economic developments in a manner that reduces or blunts potentially harmful consequences.
Monetary policy will thus have an "automatic stabilizer" effect that operates through private-sector expectations.
It is important to note that tying the response of policy to the economy necessarily makes the future course of the federal funds rate uncertain.
But by responding to changing circumstances, policy can be most effective at reducing uncertainty about the course of inflation and employment.
The FOMC's main policy tool, the federal funds rate, was well above zero, leaving ample scope to respond to the modest shocks that buffeted the economy during that period.
Many studies confirmed that the appropriate response of policy to those shocks could be described with a fair degree of accuracy by a simple rule linking the federal funds rate to the shortfall or excess of employment and inflation relative to their desired values.17 The famous Taylor rule provides one such formula.18 
The idea that monetary policy should react in a systematic manner in order to blunt the effects of shocks has remained central in the FOMC's policymaking during this recovery.
With the federal funds rate pinned near zero, the FOMC has been forced to rely on two less familiar policy tools--the first one being forward guidance regarding the future setting of the federal funds rate and the second being large-scale asset purchases.
There are no time-tested guidelines for how these tools should be adjusted in response to changes in the outlook.
As the episodes recounted earlier illustrate, the FOMC has continued to try to adjust its policy tools in a systematic manner in response to new information about the economy.
But because both the tools and the economic conditions have been unfamiliar, it has also been critical that the FOMC communicate how it expects to deploy its tools in response to material changes in the outlook.
Let me review some important elements in the evolution of the FOMC's communication framework.
When the FOMC initially began using its unconventional tools, policy communication was relatively simple.
In December 2008, for example, the FOMC said it expected that conditions would warrant keeping the federal funds rate near zero for "some time." This period before the "liftoff" in the federal funds rate was described in increasingly specific, and (as it turned out) longer, periods over time--"some time" became "an extended period," which was later changed to "mid-2013," then "late 2014," then "mid-2015."19 This fixed, calendar-based guidance had the virtue of simplicity, but it lacked the automatic stabilizer property of communication that would signal how and why the stance of policy and forward guidance might change as developments unfolded, and as we learned about the extent of the need for accommodation.
More recently, the Federal Reserve, and I might add, other central banks around the world, have sought to incorporate this automatic stabilizer feature in their communications.20 In December 2012, the Committee reformulated its forward guidance, stating that it anticipated that the federal funds rate would remain near zero at least as long as the unemployment rate remained above 6-1/2 percent, inflation over the period between one and two years ahead was projected to be no more than half a percentage point above the Committee's objective, and longer-term inflation expectations continued to be well anchored.
This guidance emphasized to the public that it could count on a near-zero federal funds rate at least until substantial progress in the recovery had been achieved, however long that might take.
When these thresholds were announced, the unemployment rate was reported to be 7.7 percent, and the Committee projected that the 6-1/2 percent threshold would not be reached for another 2-1/2 years--in mid-2015.
The Committee emphasized that these numerical criteria were not triggers for raising the federal funds rate, and Chairman Bernanke stated that, ultimately, any decision to begin removing accommodation would be based on a wide range of indicators.21 
Our communications about asset purchases have undergone a similar transformation.
The initial asset purchase programs had fixed time and quantity limits, although those limits came with a proviso that they might be adjusted.
In the fall of 2012, the FOMC launched its current purchase program, this time explicitly tying the course of the program to evolving economic conditions.
When the program began, the rate of purchases was $85 billion per month, and the Committee indicated that purchases would continue, providing that inflation remained well behaved, until there was a substantial improvement in the outlook for the labor market.22 
Based on the cumulative progress toward maximum employment since the initiation of the program and the improvement in the outlook for the labor market, the FOMC began reducing the pace of asset purchases last December, stating that "[i]f incoming information broadly supports the Committee's expectation of ongoing improvement in labor market conditions and inflation moving back toward its longer-term objective, the Committee will likely reduce the pace of asset purchases in further measured steps at future meetings."23 Purchases are currently proceeding at a pace of $55 billion per month.
At our most recent meeting in March, the FOMC reformulated its forward guidance for the federal funds rate.
While one of the main motivations for this change was that the unemployment rate might soon cross the 6-1/2 percent threshold, the new formulation is also well suited to help the FOMC explain policy adjustments that may arise in response to changes in the outlook.
I should note that the change in the forward guidance did not indicate a change in the Committee's policy intentions, but instead was made to clarify the Committee's thinking about policy as the economy continues to recover.
Specifically, in determining how long to maintain the current target range of 0 to 25 basis points for the federal funds rate, "the Committee will assess progress, both realized and expected, toward its objectives of maximum employment and 2 percent inflation."24 In other words, the larger the shortfall of employment or inflation from their respective objectives, and the slower the projected progress toward those objectives, the longer the current target range for the federal funds rate is likely to be maintained.
This approach underscores the continuing commitment of the FOMC to maintain the appropriate degree of accommodation to support the recovery.
The new guidance also reaffirms the FOMC's view that decisions about liftoff should not be based on any one indicator, but that it will take into account a wide range of information on the labor market, inflation, and financial developments.
Along with this general framework, the FOMC provided an assessment of what that framework implies for the likely path of policy under the baseline outlook.
At present, the Committee anticipates that economic and financial conditions will likely warrant maintaining the current range "for the federal funds rate for a considerable time after the asset purchase program ends, especially if projected inflation continues to run below the Committee's 2 percent longer-run goal, and provided that longer-term inflation expectations remain well anchored."25 
Finally, the Committee began explaining more fully how policy may operate in the period after liftoff, indicating its expectation that economic conditions may, for some time, warrant keeping short-term interest rates below levels the Committee views as likely to prove normal in the longer run.
FOMC participants have cited different reasons for this view, but many of the reasons involve persistent effects of the financial crisis and the possibility that the productive capacity of the economy will grow more slowly, at least for a time, than it did, on average, before the crisis.
The expectation that the achievement of our economic objectives will likely require low real interest rates for some time is again not confined to the United States but is shared broadly across many advanced economies.26 Of course, this guidance is a forecast and will evolve as we gain further evidence about how the economy is operating in the wake of the crisis and ensuing recession.
In summary, the policy framework I have described reflects the FOMC's commitment to systematically respond to unforeseen economic developments in order to promote a return to maximum employment in a context of price stability.
It is very welcome news that a return to these conditions has finally appeared in the medium-term outlook of many forecasters.
My colleagues on the FOMC and I will stay focused on doing the Federal Reserve's part to promote this goal.

These figures are based on the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) submitted in conjunction with the March 2014 FOMC meeting.
The SEP is an addendum to the FOMC minutes and is available at Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 18-19, 2014," press release, April 9.
See the FOMC's Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy (PDF),  as amended effective January 28, 2014, which is available on the Board's website at .
See the SEP in Board of Governors, "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, March 18-19, 2014," in note 2.
The share in CPS employment of persons working part time for economic reasons rose from 3 percent prior to the recession to 6.5 percent in November 2009, and it has since then declined only to 5 percent.
The share in the labor force of those unemployed for more than 26 weeks rose from less than 1 percent prior to the recession to 4.5 percent, and it has since declined to just below 2.5 percent; the previous peak for this series was 2.5 percent in 1983.
Yellen (2014), "What the Federal Reserve Is Doing to Promote a Stronger Job Market," speech delivered at the 2014 National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conference, Chicago, March 31.
For the view that most of the recent decline in labor force participation reflects retirement, see Shigeru Fujita (2014), "On the Causes of Declines in the Labor Force Participation Rate," (PDF) Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, special report, Research Rap, February 6.
Levin (2013), "Labor Force Participation and Monetary Policy in the Wake of the Great Recession," paper presented at "Fulfilling the Full Employment Mandate--Monetary Policy and the Labor Market," 57th Economic Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, April 12.
If firms' and households' spending decisions depended only on longer-term interest rates, temporarily higher short-term real interest rates due to low inflation at a time that nominal interest rates are constrained by the zero lower bound would have little economic effects, provided that these higher short-term real interest rates would be expected to be compensated by lower short-term real interest rates later on.
However, to the extent that these spending decisions depend in part on shorter-term real interest rates, low inflation can induce meaningful economic costs.
The uncertainty surrounding the empirical relationship between slack and inflation is discussed in James H.
Watson (2009), "Phillips Curve Inflation Forecasts," in Jeff Fuhrer, Yolanda K.
Olivei, eds., Understanding Inflation and the Implications for Monetary Policy: A Phillips Curve Retrospective (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press).
Moreover, with the share of long-term unemployed in total unemployment unusually elevated in recent years, there is an ongoing discussion about whether short- and long-term unemployment have differential effects on inflation.
Gordon (2013), "The Phillips Curve Is Alive and Well: Inflation and the NAIRU during the Slow Recovery," NBER Working Paper Series 19390 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August); and Mark W.
Watson (forthcoming), "Inflation Persistence, the NAIRU, and the Great Recession," American Economic Review.
These forecasts were similar to the central tendency of FOMC participants' projections for the unemployment rate at the end of 2011 submitted in conjunction with the April 2010 FOMC meeting, which ranged from 8.1 to 8.5 percent.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, April 27-28, 2010," press release, May 19.
In the statement following its August 10, 2010, meeting, the FOMC noted that "the pace of recovery in output and employment has slowed in recent months." See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), "FOMC Statement," press release, August 10.
See also the discussion in the minutes of that meeting: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2010), "Minutes of the Federal Open Market Committee, August 10, 2010," press release, August 31.
See, respectively, Aspen Publishers (2011), Blue Chip Economic Indicators, vol.
For the FOMC's calendar-based forward guidance as communicated in its August 2011 statement, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "FOMC Statement," press release, August 9.
For the description of the FOMC's maturity extension program that appeared in its September 2011 statement, see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2011), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 21.
Bernanke (2012), "Monetary Policy since the Onset of the Crisis," speech delivered at "The Changing Policy Landscape," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 30-September 1.
Williams (2011), "Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy," chap.
Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics, vol.
(An April 2010 working paper version of this chapter is available on the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's website (PDF)) Return to text
Taylor (1993), "Discretion versus Policy Rules in Practice," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2008), "FOMC Statement and Board Approval of Discount Rate Requests of the Federal Reserve Banks of New York, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Minneapolis, and San Francisco," press release, December 16; Board of Governors (2009), "FOMC Statement," press release, March 18, Board of Governors (2011), "FOMC Statement," press release, August 9; Board of Governors (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, January 25; and Board of Governors (2012), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, September 13.
The Bank of England introduced threshold-based forward guidance in August 2013 and adopted more-qualitative forward guidance in February 2014; see Bank of England, "Forward Guidance," webpage.
The European Central Bank recently linked its forward guidance more explicitly to its assessment of economic slack, as discussed in President Mario Draghi's press conference on March 6, 2014; see Mario Draghi (2014), "Introductory Statement to the Press Conference (with Q&A),"  European Central Bank, Frankfurt, March 6.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2012), "Transcript of Chairman Bernanke's Press Conference, December 12, 2012 (PDF),".
See Board of Governors, "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," September 13, 2012, in note 19.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2013), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, December 18.
See Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2014), "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," press release, March 19.
See Board of Governors, "Federal Reserve Issues FOMC Statement," March 19, 2014, in note 24.
See the discussion in International Monetary Fund (2014), "Perspectives on Global Real Interest Rates (PDF)," chap.
3 in World Economic Outlook: Recovery Strengthens, Remains Uneven (Washington: IMF, April).

At the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta's 2014 Financial Markets Conference, Atlanta, Georgia (via prerecorded video)
I'd like to share a few thoughts about the important issues that the Financial Markets Conference (FMC) is addressing this year.
Many of these issues, of course, are ones the FMC has grappled with every year since the crisis, an event which elevated the importance of this gathering and of the vital contributions made by the research and the policy discussion the FMC fosters.
Maturity transformation is a central part of the economic function of banks and many other types of financial intermediaries.
But as we saw in the crisis, maturity transformation also exposes intermediaries to liquidity risk, particularly when intermediaries are heavily reliant on short-term wholesale funding.
In 2007 and 2008, short-term creditors ran from firms such as Northern Rock, Bear Stearns, and Lehman Brothers, and from money market mutual funds and asset-backed commercial paper programs.
Together, these runs were the primary engine of a financial crisis from which the United States and the global economy have yet to fully recover.
In response to the crisis, the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision's first task was to strengthen bank capital requirements through the adoption of the Basel III capital accord and, last summer, our domestic rule implementing the Basel III capital requirements in the United States.
Strong bank capital rules remain the foundation of bank regulation.
But capital requirements as currently constructed are generally based on credit and market risks from the asset side of the balance sheet and from off-balance-sheet transactions.
Thus, the Basel Committee's second task was to develop new liquidity standards for global banking firms: the Liquidity Coverage Ratio (LCR) and the Net Stable Funding Ratio (NSFR).
The LCR is designed to improve a bank's ability to withstand severe short-term liquidity stress events by requiring banking firms to hold a buffer of highly liquid assets to cover net cash outflows in a 30-day stress scenario.
The NSFR is meant to promote resilience over a one-year horizon by requiring banks that hold less liquid assets to fund their activities with more stable sources of funding.
As others have observed, the new Basel liquidity standards address financial stability risks associated with excessive maturity transformation through at least two channels.
In the case of the LCR, requiring firms to hold a buffer of highly liquid assets will help to ensure that they have a means of generating liquidity in the event of creditor runs.
In the case of the NSFR, requiring firms to use higher levels of stable funding for less liquid assets reduces the vulnerabilities of a firm to structural maturity mismatches.
Banking firms that self-insure against liquidity risk in these ways are less likely to need government liquidity support in times of stress.
Second, the new standards provide an incentive for firms to move to more stable funding structures.
Under the LCR and NSFR, firms that engage in unstable forms of maturity transformation will be required to maintain buffers of highly liquid assets and use stable funding, both of which will impose costs for the firms.
Reducing the amount of maturity transformation they engage in will help firms minimize these costs.
While the LCR and NSFR are important steps forward, they do not fully address the financial stability concerns associated with short-term wholesale funding.
These standards tend to focus on the liquidity positions of firms taken in isolation, rather than on the financial system as a whole.
They only apply to internationally active banks, and not directly to shadow banks, despite the fact that liquidity shocks within the shadow banking system played a major role in the crisis.
Furthermore, the current versions of the LCR and NSFR do not address financial stability risks associated with so-called matched books of securities financing transactions.
Federal Reserve staff are actively considering additional measures that could address these and other residual risks in the short-term wholesale funding markets.
Some of these measures--such as requiring firms to hold larger amounts of capital, stable funding, or highly liquid assets based on use of short-term wholesale funding--would likely apply only to the largest, most complex banking organizations.
Other measures--such as minimum margin requirements for repurchase agreements and other securities financing transactions--could, at least in principle, apply on a marketwide basis.
In designing such measures, we are carefully thinking through questions about the tradeoffs associated with tighter liquidity regulation that will be discussed at this conference.
In 2010, the Basel Committee assessed the long-term economic impact of stronger capital and liquidity requirements for global banks.
Factoring in the Basel III capital requirements and the NSFR, the Basel study suggested that tightening risk-based capital and liquidity requirements would, on net, provide economic benefits, and that benefits would continue to accrue at even higher levels of risk-based capital than are part of Basel III.
While it would be a mistake to give undue weight to any one study, this study provides some support for the view that there might be room for stronger capital and liquidity standards for large banks than have been adopted so far.
As the Board continues to weigh such steps to further strengthen the financial system, I expect that conferences like the FMC will continue to be a vital part of the process, providing the ideas, analysis, and debate that will help us make the best possible judgments.
Thank you for listening and for this opportunity to be a part of this important conference.

Minsky Conference: Stabilizing Financial Systems for Growth and Full Employment, Washington, D.C.
In the more than five years that I have been a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, it has been hard not to concentrate on near-term economic prospects.
The severe decline in the economy precipitated by the financial crisis and the magnitude of job and production loss in the Great Recession that followed have made a focus on recovery both understandable and imperative.
But as I have prepared for Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meetings every six to seven weeks by examining incoming data and the analyses of our own staff and of outside economists, I have been struck by the evidence of longer-term challenges to the American economy that poke through shorter-term discussions.
There is considerable ongoing debate about whether the financial crisis and recession amplified changes already afoot in the economy, accelerated them, or simply revealed them more clearly.
Whatever one's view on that question, the confluence of some apparently secular trends raises important questions about our nation's future growth potential and our ability to provide opportunity for all of our people.
Indeed, these changes reflect serious challenges not only to the functioning of the American economy over the coming decades, but also to some of the ideals that undergird the nation's democratic heritage.
This evening I will address in some detail four particularly important developments:
As a result, the overall economic pie is expanding more slowly than before.
Some indicators further suggest that workers have been claiming a smaller share of the overall economic pie during the past decade.
Inequality has continued to increase, meaning that a larger portion of overall economic resources is commanded by a smaller segment of the population.
Economic mobility across generations is not particularly high in the United States, and it has not been increasing over time.
After detailing these trends, I will turn briefly to both the role and the limits of monetary policy in countering them.1 
Over the long term, the pace at which our standards of living increase depends on the growth of labor productivity--that is, the increase in the amount of economic value that a worker can generate during each hour on the job.
Unfortunately, the data on productivity growth in recent years have been disappointing.
Although output per hour in the nonfarm business sector rose about 2-3/4 percent per year from the end of World War II through 1971, productivity has risen just 1-1/2 percent per year since then, excluding a brief burst of rapid growth that occurred roughly between 1996 and 2004.
Some have argued that the burst of productivity growth that began in the mid-1990s was the anomaly, and that the more pedestrian pace of growth over the past decade represents a return to the norm.2 In this view, the long period of rapid productivity growth that ended in the 1970s grew out of the technological innovations of the first and second Industrial Revolutions.
But now, despite continued technological advances, a return to that pace of performance is thought unlikely.
Indeed, some have argued that the problem with new technology is not with productivity growth but with our ability to capture the productivity in our statistics.
Moreover, many economists and technophiles remain optimistic that we have yet to fully realize the potential of the information revolution, and that technological change will continue to bring inventions and productivity enhancements that we cannot imagine today.3 This view holds that there is no reason productivity could not continue to rise in line with its long-term historical average.4 
In particular, some in this camp believe that we are likely to see a continuation of the pattern by which recent productivity growth seems to have mostly benefited relatively skilled workers.
It may also have favored returns to capital investment, as opposed to labor, in greater proportion than past productivity gains.
While there is some reason for optimism about the prospects for technological progress, there are grounds for concern over the decline in the dynamism of the U.S.
labor market, an attribute that has contributed to productivity growth in the past and has traditionally distinguished the United States from many other advanced economies.
Our high rates of geographic mobility are one facet of the overall dynamism of our labor market, which is also manifest in the continual churning of jobs through hirings and separations, as well as firm expansions and contractions--a process that the economist Joseph Schumpeter called "creative destruction."5 To give a sense of the magnitude of this process, while net job gains and losses are typically measured in the hundreds of thousands each calendar quarter, gross job creation and destruction commonly run at a pace of roughly 7 million jobs each quarter.
However, a variety of data indicate that this feature of labor market dynamism has diminished.
Since the 1980s, internal migration in the United States over both long and short distances has declined.
To give an example, the rate of cross-state migration was less than half as large in 2011 as its average over the period from 1948 to 1971.7 And, while we still see the level of employment rising and falling over the business cycle, the gross flows of people between jobs and of jobs across firms that underlie the observed aggregate changes have fallen over the past 15 years.
At this point, we do not have a full understanding of the factors contributing to the decline in labor market dynamism.
Moreover, some of the decline in turnover could be the result of individuals and firms finding productive job matches more quickly than before.
This more efficient process could result in better matches between firms and workers and thus fewer separations.
In both cases, workers and firms are able to achieve a good outcome with less turnover and presumably no loss of productivity.
While it seems possible that improved information could be a force behind the reduction in geographic mobility and labor turnover, there are less benign possibilities as well.
For instance, an increase in the costs to firms of hiring and firing individuals or an increase in the costs to individuals of changing jobs could lead to fewer productivity-enhancing job changes.
Alternatively, the reduction in churning could itself be a function of slower productivity growth, as slower productivity growth implies lower benefits to forming new matches.
Statistics from the Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) show that the number of establishments in operation for less than one year rose between the mid-1990s, when the data start, and the early 2000s.
Moreover, the number of individuals working at such firms stands almost 2 million below its peak in 1999.
Given the role of innovation by entrepreneurs and the well-documented importance of successful young firms in creating jobs, these trends are disheartening.
Here I will be brief and suggestive because the scholarship is far from settled.
It stood at 56 percent at the end of 2013, the lowest level since the BLS began collecting data on the measure in 1948.
However, taken at face value, these data have significant implications for the distribution of income in our society, given how skewed the holdings of capital are.
Economists have focused less attention on the factors underlying the apparent decline in labor's share of income than they have on the rise in income inequality in general, but among the candidates are technological change, which has allowed for the substitution of capital for labor in the handling of routine tasks, an increase in firm bargaining power, and perhaps a decline in competition in product markets.
As interesting as these statistics on inequality are, they obscure a key part of the story--one that has been an important part of our identity as Americans: whether a family has the ability, through hard work, to attain a better standard of living.
And on that point, we find that households in the middle and lower parts of the earnings distribution have experienced, at best, only modest improvements in inflation-adjusted income.10 Between 1979 and 2007, households in the middle quintile of the income distribution--a functional definition of the middle class--saw their real labor income (adjusted for household size) rise only about 3 percent.
The polarization of the labor income distribution has been mirrored in the types of jobs we are creating.
There have been healthy gains in employment in highly paid occupations, such as computer and information systems managers, and a rise in low-paid jobs, such as home health-care workers, but growth has been much slower in occupations with earnings in the middle of the distribution, such as machinists.
For example, food services, retail, and employment services, all low-wage industries, accounted for nearly 45 percent of net employment growth from the start of the recovery through early 2012, while employment in a number of industries that offer good jobs for mid-wage workers--including construction, manufacturing, and finance, insurance, and real estate--did not grow in those years or grew too slowly to make up for their job losses during the recession.11 
However, other researchers have noted that a large share of the top earners is found in industries such as finance and law, suggesting that deregulation, corporate governance, and tax policy may have also played a role in the trend toward rising inequality.
Despite the fact that rising inequality has compounded the stakes associated with one's position in the income distribution, mobility up and down the economic ladder from one generation to the next in the United States has been stagnant.
And, despite the long-held view of the United States as the land of opportunity, we actually fall short of other advanced economies in terms of intergenerational mobility.
In the United Kingdom, for example, about 30 percent of sons with low-income parents end up being low-income themselves, while in the United States the comparable figure is over 40 percent.14 
It is equally apparent that monetary policy cannot be the only, or even the principal, tool in addressing these challenges.
Monetary policies directed toward achieving the statutory dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability can help reduce underemployment associated with low aggregate demand.
And, to the degree that monetary policy can prevent cyclical phenomena such as high unemployment and low investment from becoming entrenched, it might be able to improve somewhat the potential growth rate of the economy over the medium term.15 
More generally, reducing labor market slack can help lay the foundation for a more sustained, self-reinforcing cycle of stronger aggregate demand, increased production, renewed investment, and productivity gains.
Similarly, a stronger labor market can provide a modest countervailing factor to income inequality trends by leading to higher wages at the bottom rungs of the wage scale.
The very accommodative monetary policy of the past five years has contributed significantly to the extended, moderate recoveries of gross domestic product (GDP) and employment.
To be sure, there have been notable wage increases in specific areas of the country enjoying economic growth much higher than the national average.
And, as is nearly always the case, labor shortages in discrete skilled job categories may be placing some upward pressures on wages for those jobs (though, judging by such aggregate data as we have, not by as much as one might have thought based on the widespread anecdotal reports of skilled labor shortages).
Compensation increases have been running at the historically low level of just over 2 percent annual rates since the onset of the Great Recession, with concomitantly lower real wage gains.
The reasons for the lag in wage gains in the context of continuing moderate growth are not totally clear.
Nominal wage rigidity on the downside may have played a role to the extent that employers were reluctant to cut nominal wages even in the period from late 2008 to early 2009, when they were eliminating jobs in staggering numbers.
The secular labor market factors mentioned earlier are also likely relevant.
There is, of course, also a debate around the question of how much of current unemployment--particularly long-term unemployment--is structural and thus how much slack still exists in labor markets.
We should remain attentive to evidence that labor markets have actually tightened to the point that there is demonstrable inflationary pressure that would place at risk maintenance of the FOMC's stated inflation target (which, of course, we are currently not meeting on the downside).
But we should not rush to act preemptively in anticipation of such pressures based on arguments about the potential increase in structural unemployment in recent years.
In this regard, the issue of how much structural damage has been suffered by the labor market is of less immediate concern today in shaping monetary policy than it might have been had we experienced a period of rapid growth during the recovery.
Remember that, just a few years ago, many forecasters--in and out of the Federal Reserve--were projecting growth rates at an annualized rate of 4 percent or greater for at least a year.
That expectation raised the question of whether a reasonably rapid tightening in monetary policy might at some point be needed.
But now, in part because we did not have such a spike in the early stages of recovery and instead have had modest growth in place for several years, it seems less likely that we will experience a growth spurt in the next couple of years that would engender concerns about rapid wage pressures and changes in inflation expectations.
In short, by promoting maximum employment in a stable inflation environment around the FOMC target rate, monetary policy can help set the stage for a vibrant and dynamic economy.
But there are limits to what monetary policy can do in counteracting the longer-term trends I have discussed.
In economic research and in policy debates, we need more focus on these issues and more attention to concrete proposals to address them.
A pro-investment policy agenda by the government could help address some of our nation's long-term challenges by promoting investment in human capital, particularly for those who have seen their share of the economic pie shrink, and by encouraging research and development and other capital investments that increase the productive capacity of the nation.
For instance, early childhood education can increase the educational attainment of children from low-income families as well as improve other outcomes.16 In addition, recent innovations in job training programs, which more tightly link the training to the needs of employers in sectors of the economy with a demand for workers, have been shown to increase both the employment and wages of participants.17 
Investment in basic research by the federal government is another area in which greater investments could yield significant returns and in which a public policy role is warranted because of externalities.
Econometric studies suggest that the rates of return to this type of investment can be very high.18 And a range of policy commentators agree that there is a continuing role for government investment in infrastructure, including various forms of transportation, as a way to enhance productivity.
Not too long ago, the American Society of Civil Engineers gave the United States a rating of D on its roads and bridges.
In fact, spending in these areas is currently not a very large proportion of federal outlays.
For example, the entire federal budget for nondefense research programs--including expenditures on health research, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the National Science Foundation--is only 2 percent of federal spending (or less than 0.4 percent of GDP), well below the share in the 1960s, when we last made a significant effort to advance our capacities in math and science during the era of space exploration.
After a surge associated with fiscal stimulus during the recent recession, public spending on infrastructure has tumbled, resulting in the slowest growth (1 percent) in the state and local capital stock since WWII.
And even a strong investment agenda would not be a complete response to the economic challenges I have discussed.
But, like monetary policy, it could play a useful role.
The longer-term challenges to the American economy that I have identified this evening are real.
On the contrary, the American economy is still possessed of great advantages and potential that, while always and necessarily evolving, have served us well over the years.20 My principal aims this evening have been, first, to echo those who have been drawing attention to these challenges in recent years and, second, to encourage more discussion and debate of the specific policies that can best help us meet these challenges.
As should be apparent in my remarks on monetary policy and an investment agenda, I believe that there are policies already developed and available to us that can contribute to this effort.
Productivity Growth over the Past Century with a View of the Future," NBER Working Paper Series 15834 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, March); and Robert J.
Economic Growth Over? Faltering Innovation Confronts the Six Headwinds," NBER Working Paper Series 18315 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, August).
See, for example, Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee (2011), Race Against the Machine: How the Digital Revolution Is Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly Transforming Employment and the Economy (Lexington, Mass.: Digital Frontier Press); Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee (2014), The Second Machine Age: Work, Progress, and Prosperity in a Time of Brilliant Technologies (New York: W.W.
Sichel (2013), "Is the Information Technology Revolution Over?" International Productivity Monitor, no.
Krizan (2006), "Market Selection, Reallocation, and Restructuring in the U.S.
For more information on the rate of cross-state migration, see Raven Molloy, Christopher L.
Smith, and Abigail Wozniak (2013), "Declining Migration within the U.S.: The Role of the Labor Market," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-27 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).
For additional details on the decline in labor market dynamism, see Henry R.
Spletzer (2013), "The Recent Decline in Employment Dynamics (PDF)," Center for Economic Studies Working Paper Series 13-03 (Washington: U.S.
This measure of income accounts for total compensation, including health benefits, and capital income, government transfers, and taxes while also adjusting for household size.
For more information on this trend, see National Employment Law Project (2012), "The Low-Wage Recovery and Growing Inequality (PDF)," data brief (New York: NELP, August).
Hanson (2013), "Untangling Trade and Technology: Evidence from Local Labor Markets," NBER Working Paper Series 18938 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, April).
For a discussion of mobility in income distribution, see Raj Chetty, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, Emmanuel Saez, and Nicholas Turner (2014), "Is the United States Still a Land of Opportunity? Recent Trends in Intergenerational Mobility," NBER Working Paper Series 19844 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, January).
For more information on intergenerational mobility, see Markus Jäntti, Bernt Bratsberg, Knut Røed, Oddbjørn Raaum, Robin Naylor, Eva Österbacka, Anders Björklund, and Tor Eriksson (2006), "American Exceptionalism in a New Light: A Comparison of Intergenerational Earnings Mobility in the Nordic Countries, the United Kingdom, and the United States (PDF)," IZA Discussion Paper Series 1938 (Bonn, Germany: Institute for the Study of Labor, January).
For details on the potential growth rate of the economy, see Dave Reifschneider, William Wascher, and David Wilcox (2013), "Aggregate Supply in the United States: Recent Developments and Implications for the Conduct of Monetary Policy," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2013-77 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, November).
Savelyev, and Adam Yavitz (2010), "The Rate of Return to the HighScope Perry Preschool Program," Journal of Public Economics, vol.
Cascio and Diane Schanzenbach (forthcoming), "The Impacts of Expanding Access to High-Quality Preschool Education," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity.
For a discussion of such rates of return, see, for example, Sheila Maguire, Joshua Freely, Carol Clymer, Maureen Conway, and Deena Schwartz (2010), Tuning in to Local Labor Markets: Findings from the Sectoral Employment Impact Study (Philadelphia: Public/Private Ventures).
Economic Growth in a World of Ideas," American Economic Review, vol.
These advantages--such as the country's substantial natural resources, a stable but adaptive legal framework for economic activity, a dynamic labor market, and a fostering of entrepreneurship--have contributed to productivity growth that is estimated to have averaged about 2-1/4 percent over the past 140 years.
Sichel (2013), "Is the Information Technology Revolution Over?" International Productivity Monitor, No.

What the Federal Reserve Is Doing to Promote a Stronger Job Market
At the 2014 National Interagency Community Reinvestment Conference, Chicago, Illinois
I am here today to talk about what the Federal Reserve is doing to help our nation recover from the financial crisis and the Great Recession, the effects of which were particularly severe for the people and the communities you serve.
New rules are in place to better protect consumers and ensure that credit is available to help communities grow.
The Federal Reserve also plays a role in communities by fostering dialogue that promotes community development.
I will highlight some initiatives around the Federal Reserve System that I believe are making a real difference.
The Fed supports the work you do in communities because you make a difference.
You help ensure that credit is available for families to buy homes and for small businesses to expand.
One of the most important things you do is to help people meet the demands of finding a job in what remains a challenging economy.
These individuals have benefited from just the kind of help from community groups that I highlighted a moment ago, and they recently shared their personal stories with me.
I have mentioned some of the things the Fed does to help communities, but the most important thing we do is to use monetary policy to promote a stronger economy.
The Federal Reserve has taken extraordinary steps since the onset of the financial crisis to spur economic activity and create jobs, and I will explain why I believe those efforts are still needed.
By keeping interest rates low, we are trying to make homes more affordable and revive the housing market.
When the Federal Reserve's policies are effective, they improve the welfare of everyone who benefits from a stronger economy, most of all those who have been hit hardest by the recession and the slow recovery.
Now let me offer my view of the state of the recovery, with particular attention to the labor market and conditions faced by workers.
Nationwide, and in Chicago, the economy and the labor market have strengthened considerably from the depths of the Great Recession.
Since the unemployment rate peaked at 10 percent in October 2009, the economy has added more than 7-1/2 million jobs and the unemployment rate has fallen more than 3 percentage points to 6.7 percent.
Chicago, as you all know, was hit harder than many areas during the recession and remains a tougher market for workers.
Unemployment in the city of Chicago is down from a peak of nearly 13 percent to about 9-1/2 percent at last count.
That is about the same improvement as in the larger Chicago metro area, where unemployment has fallen to 8-1/2 percent.
Metro Chicago has added 183,000 jobs since 2009, just below the rate for job gains nationwide.1 
But while there has been steady progress, there is also no doubt that the economy and the job market are not back to normal health.
The recovery still feels like a recession to many Americans, and it also looks that way in some economic statistics.
At 6.7 percent, the national unemployment rate is still higher than it ever got during the 2001 recession.
It certainly feels like a recession to many younger workers, to older workers who lost long-term jobs, and to African Americans, who are facing a job market today that is nearly as tough as it was during the two downturns that preceded the Great Recession.
In some ways, the job market is tougher now than in any recession.
When employers started hiring again, two years of unemployment became a disqualification.
Then she lost a job processing mortgage applications when the housing market crashed.
The unemployment rate is down, but not included in that rate are more than seven million people who are working part time but want a full-time job.
I have described the experiences of Dorine, Jermaine, and Vicki because they tell us important things that the unemployment rate alone cannot.
And based on the evidence available, it is clear to me that the U.S.
economy is still considerably short of the two goals assigned to the Federal Reserve by the Congress.
The first of those goals is maximum sustainable employment, the highest level of employment that can be sustained while maintaining a stable inflation rate.
Most of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee and I estimate that the unemployment rate consistent with maximum sustainable employment is now between 5.2 percent and 5.6 percent, well below the 6.7 percent rate in February.
The other goal assigned by the Congress is stable prices, which means keeping inflation under control.
In the past, there have been times when these two goals conflicted--fighting inflation often requires actions that slow the economy and raise the unemployment rate.
But that is not a dilemma now, because inflation is well below 2 percent, the Fed's longer-term goal.
One reason why I believe it is appropriate for the Federal Reserve to continue to provide substantial help to the labor market, without adding to the risks of inflation, is because of the evidence I see that there remains considerable slack in the economy and the labor market.
With 6.7 percent unemployment, it might seem that there must be a lot of slack in the U.S.
One important reason relates to the skills and education of people in the workforce.
Many of you in this audience are helping workers address this challenge, but you also know that the economy continues to change very rapidly.
To the extent that people who desire to work lack the skills that employers are demanding, there is less slack in the labor market.
But a lack of jobs is the heart of the problem when unemployment is caused by slack, which we also call "cyclical unemployment." The government has the tools to address cyclical unemployment.
Monetary policy is one such tool, and the Federal Reserve has been actively using it to strengthen the recovery and create jobs, which brings me to why the amount of slack is so important.
If unemployment were mostly structural, if workers were unable to perform the jobs available, then the Federal Reserve's efforts to create jobs would not be very effective.
Worse than that, without slack in the labor market, the economic stimulus from the Fed could put attaining our inflation goal at risk.
In fact, judging how much slack there is in the labor market is one of the most important questions that my Federal Reserve colleagues and I consider when making monetary policy decisions, because our inflation goal is no less important than the goal of maximum employment.
For Dorine Poole, Jermaine Brownlee, and Vicki Lira, and for millions of others dislocated by the Great Recession who continue to struggle, the cause of the slow recovery is enormously important.
Now let me explain why I believe there is still considerable slack in the labor market, why I think there is room for continued help from the Fed for workers, and why I believe Dorine Poole, Jermaine Brownlee, and Vicki Lira are right to hope for better days ahead.
One form of evidence for slack is found in other labor market data, beyond the unemployment rate or payrolls, some of which I have touched on already.
This number is much larger than we would expect at 6.7 percent unemployment, based on past experience, and the existence of such a large pool of "partly unemployed" workers is a sign that labor conditions are worse than indicated by the unemployment rate.
Statistics on job turnover also point to considerable slack in the labor market.
Although firms are now laying off fewer workers, they have been reluctant to increase the pace of hiring.
Likewise, the number of people who voluntarily quit their jobs is noticeably below levels before the recession; that is an indicator that people are reluctant to risk leaving their jobs because they worry that it will be hard to find another.
It is also a sign that firms may not be recruiting very aggressively to hire workers away from their competitors.
A second form of evidence for slack is that the decline in unemployment has not helped raise wages for workers as in past recoveries.
Workers in a slack market have little leverage to demand raises.
Labor compensation has increased an average of only a little more than 2 percent per year since the recession, which is very low by historical standards.5 Wage growth for most workers was modest for a couple of decades before the recession due to globalization and other factors beyond the level of economic activity, and those forces are undoubtedly still relevant.
But labor market slack has also surely been a factor in holding down compensation.
The low rate of wage growth is, to me, another sign that the Fed's job is not yet done.
And, although they find jobs with lower frequency than the short-term jobless do, the rate at which job seekers are finding jobs has only marginally improved for both groups.
This fact gives me hope that a significant share of the long-term unemployed will ultimately benefit from a stronger labor market.
A final piece of evidence of slack in the labor market has been the behavior of the participation rate--the proportion of working-age adults that hold or are seeking jobs.
Participation falls in a slack job market when people who want a job give up trying to find one.
When the recession began, 66 percent of the working-age population was part of the labor force.
It now stands at 63 percent, the same level as in 1978, when a much smaller share of women were in the workforce.
Lower participation could mean that the 6.7 percent unemployment rate is overstating the progress in the labor market.
If demographics were the only or overwhelming reason for falling participation, then declining participation would not be a sign of labor market slack.
But some "retirements" are not voluntary, and some of these workers may rejoin the labor force in a stronger economy.
At the height of the crisis, we provided liquidity to help avert a collapse of the financial system, which enabled banks and other institutions to continue to provide credit to people and businesses depending on it.
We cut short-term interest rates as low as they can go and indicated that we would keep them low for as long as necessary to support a stronger economic recovery.
And we have been purchasing large quantities of longer-term securities in order to put additional downward pressure on longer-term interest rates‑-the rates that matter to people shopping for a new car, looking to buy or renovate a home, or expand a business.
In this context, recent steps by the Fed to reduce the rate of new securities purchases are not a lessening of this commitment, only a judgment that recent progress in the labor market means our aid for the recovery need not grow as quickly.
This commitment is strong, and I believe the Fed's policies will continue to help sustain progress in the job market.
In the meanwhile, the Federal Reserve will continue to expand its efforts to promote community development.
The Board and each of the 12 Reserve Banks have community development staff members who focus on improving the availability of financial services in low- and moderate-income communities.
They help bankers comply with the Community Reinvestment Act, but they are also a source of research and a facilitator of communication among financial institutions and practitioners to identify and share best practices.
This conference is one example of how the Fed pursues those goals, and I would like to mention a few of the Fed's other community development initiatives that I find particularly promising.
In 2012, The Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco partnered with the Low Income Investment Fund (LIIF), a community development financial institution that bridges the gap between low-income neighborhoods and private capital sources, to publish the book Investing in What Works for America's Communities.
This book cited innovative and effective community development initiatives across the country and advocated for a "Community Quarterback" model to coordinate initiatives and better leverage funding among groups with similar goals.
In a similar way, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston has been the catalyst for the Working Cities Challenge, inspired by its own research on cities that managed to diversify away from a declining, manufacturing-based economy.
Six cities were awarded funds this past January, but many more will benefit from the spread of a new approach to capacity building that Fed research shows helps communities thrive.
Leadership recruitment is also at the heart of a grassroots-oriented program called Economic Avenue that was developed by the Kansas City Fed.
The bank's community development staff is providing education and training to get the council off the ground, will measure and evaluate its progress, and assist in connecting leaders to resources and other programs.
These examples are just a few among many throughout the Federal Reserve System.
By testing ideas, developing better measurement tools, convening interested parties, and sharing the Federal Reserve's skills and knowledge with our partners at the national and local levels, we aim to serve as a catalyst to improve lives.
Through these initiatives, together with the use of monetary policy and steps to safeguard the financial system, the Federal Reserve is committed to strengthening communities and restoring a healthy economy that benefits all Americans.
According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, total nonfarm employment for the Chicago-Joliet-Naperville metropolitan division has increased 183,000 since December 2009, or about 5 percent.
Over this period, employment nationally has increased about 6 percent.
Bureau of Labor Statistics Local Area Unemployment Statistics for the Chicago-Joliet-Naperville metropolitan division.
Notowidigdo (2013), "Duration Dependence and Labor Market Conditions: Evidence from a Field Experiment," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
Sullivan (1993), "Earnings Losses of Displaced Workers," American Economic Review, vol.
Davis and Till von Wachter (2011), "Recessions and the Costs of Job Loss (PDF)," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Fall, pp.
1-55; Till von Wachter, Jae Song, and Joyce Manchester (2009), "Long-Term Earnings Losses due to Mass Layoffs during the 1982 Recession: An Analysis Using U.S.
Administrative Data from 1974 to 2004 (PDF)," unpublished paper, April; and Daniel Cooper (2014), "The Effect of Unemployment Duration on Future Earnings and Other Outcomes (PDF)," Working Paper No.
From 2010 to 2013, average annual growth in compensation per hour, hourly compensation as measured in the Employment Cost Index and average hourly earnings for all employees in private industries--all independent estimates of wage and compensation growth--increased annually, on average, no more than 2-1/4 percent.

At the Harvard Law School Symposium on Building the Financial System of the Twenty-first Century: An Agenda for Europe and the United States, Armonk, New York
The financial crisis exposed, in painful and dramatic fashion, the shortcomings of existing regulatory and supervisory regimes.
In both the United States and the European Union (EU), the crisis also revealed some particular vulnerabilities created by foreign banking operations.
Let me note at the outset the now commonplace observation that we have a quite integrated international financial system, with many large, globally active firms operating within a system of national government and regulation or, in the case of the EU, a hybrid of regional and national regulation.
I add the equally commonplace observation that there is no realistic prospect for having a global banking regulator and, consequently, the responsibility and authority for financial stability will continue to rest with national or regional authorities.1 The question, then, is how responsibility for oversight of these large firms can be most effectively shared among regulators.
This, of course, is the important issue underlying the perennial challenge of home-host supervisory relations.
Another introductory observation is that--at least in a world of nations with substantially different economic circumstances, different currencies, and banking and capital markets of quite different levels of depth and development--there will be good reason to vary at least some forms of regulation across countries.
Presumptively, at least, nations should be able to adjust their regulatory systems based on local circumstances and their relative level of risk aversion as it pertains to the potential for financial instability.
Although the financial systems and economies of the United States and the EU are more similar to one another than they are to those of many other jurisdictions, they are hardly identical.
Even between these two, for example, there may be legitimate differences within the broader convergence around minimum regulatory and supervisory standards developed at the Basel Committee, the International Organization of Securities Commissions, the Financial Stability Board, and other forums.
These opening observations are important in responding to the curious charge of "Balkanization" that has been levelled at the United States and, to a lesser extent, some other jurisdictions, as a result of actions taken or proposed in response to problems presented by foreign banks during the crisis.
Another is that the charge seems implicitly, and oddly, premised on the notion that what we had in 2007 was a well-functioning, integrated global financial system with effective consolidated supervision of global banks.
A third is that the charge overlooks the fact that much of what the United States is now doing is matching what the EU has quite sensibly been doing for years.
In the rest of my remarks I will elaborate on these points, though not in the spirit of a debater's arguments, but in an effort to answer the question I posed a moment ago: How, that is, can we successfully reduce the risks to financial stability posed by large, internationally active banks? As I hope will become apparent, a theme I wish to emphasize is that we need to redouble efforts at genuine supervisory cooperation if we are to manage effectively the vulnerabilities and challenges posed by the perennial home-host issue.
Many of the Basel Committee's early activities were focused on the challenges created by gaps in the supervision of internationally active banks, as evidenced by the fact that Basel "Concordats" on supervision preceded Basel "Accords" and "Frameworks" on capital and other subjects.
This task has, of necessity, been ongoing, as experience revealed gaps in supervisory coverage and as the scale and scope of internationally active banks grew.
The principle of consolidated supervision emerged in the early 1980s to ensure that some specific banking authority--generally the home-country regulator--had a complete view of the assets and liabilities of the bank.2 This principle was reinforced and elaborated following the Bank of Credit and Commerce International episode in the early 1990s.3 
It is important to note that each Basel Committee declaration on the importance of home-country consolidated oversight has also included a statement of the obligations and prerogatives of host states in which significant foreign bank operations are located.
This feature of the Basel Committee's approach makes sense as a reflection both of the host authority's responsibility for stability of its financial system and of the practical point that a host authority will be more familiar with the characteristics and risks in its market.
In accordance with this history, the current version of the "Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision" sets out as one of its "essential criteria" for home-host relationships that "[t]he host supervisor's national laws or regulations require that the cross-border operations of foreign banks are subject to prudential, inspection and regulatory reporting requirements similar to those for domestic banks."4 
Similarly, the stated purpose of the Basel Committee in requiring consolidated capital requirements is not to remove from host countries any responsibility or discretion to apply regulatory capital requirements, but to "preserve the integrity of capital in banks with subsidiaries by eliminating double gearing."5 Likewise, and contrary to suggestions that are sometimes made, the capital accords and frameworks developed by the Basel Committee have always been explicitly minimum requirements.
Finally, it is worth noting that, in establishing a post-crisis framework for domestic systemically important banks (D-SIBs), the Basel Committee made clear that a host country may in appropriate circumstances designate domestic operations of a foreign bank as systemically important for that country, even if the parent foreign bank has already been designated a global systemically important bank (G-SIB).6 The idea informing the newly created concept of a D-SIB is that an entity whose stress or failure could destabilize a domestic financial system might thereby indirectly destabilize the international financial system.
Of course, our regulation for foreign banking organizations (FBOs) does not entail D-SIB designation or require higher than generally applicable loss absorbency.
But I cite this feature of the D-SIB framework that permits designation of the domestic operations of foreign G-SIBs because it reflects rather clearly the principle that the specific characteristics of domestic markets may call for regulation of foreign banks in the host country, not just at a consolidated level.
In short, the work of the Basel Committee over the years has not been directed at restraining host-country authorities from supervising and regulating foreign banking operations in their country.
On the contrary, the committee has repeatedly asserted the complementary responsibilities of both home and host countries to oversee large, internationally active banking groups, in the interests of both national and international financial stability.
And the committee has frequently returned to this set of issues in responding to developments that pose a threat to the safety and soundness of the international financial system.
As illustrated in figure 1, at the end of 1974, just before the Basel Committee was created, the assets of the world's 10 largest banking organizations together equaled about 8 percent of global GDP.
But their combined assets were equal to less than 3-1/2 percent of world GDP and, as illustrated in figure 2, about 10 percent of the GDP of their home country, the United States.
By 1988 the combined assets of the world's 10 largest banking organizations as a proportion of world GDP had nearly doubled to about 15 percent, a ratio that held constant during the succeeding decade, at the beginning of the emerging market financial crisis in 1997.
In the next decade--that is, up to the onset of the financial crisis in 2007--the combined assets of the world's 10 largest banks as a share of global GDP nearly tripled, to about 43 percent.
The largest bank in the world at that time, Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS), had assets equivalent to about 6.8 percent of global GDP, nearly twice the comparable figure for the three largest banks combined in 1974.
Adding the assets of Deutsche Bank and BNP Paribas--the second and third largest banks in 2007--to those of RBS, the three had combined assets equal to about 17 percent of global GDP.
Not only did the size of the largest banks change dramatically, so, too, did their scope, reflecting the overall integration of capital market and traditional lending activities that accelerated in the decade and a half preceding the crisis.
This trend was particularly apparent in the United States and the United Kingdom, homes to the world's two largest financial centers.
In the United States, the proportion of foreign banking assets to total U.S.
Today there are as many foreign as U.S.-owned banks with at least $50 billion in U.S.
assets, the threshold established by the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act for banks for which more stringent prudential measures must be established.7 Perhaps even more important was the shift in composition of foreign bank assets in the 15 years before the crisis, with the proportion of assets held in the U.S.
broker-dealers of the 10 largest FBOs rising from approximately 15 percent to roughly 50 percent.8 Today, 4 of the top 10 broker-dealers in the United States, and 12 of the top 20, are owned by foreign banks.
Meanwhile, even the traditional branching model of large foreign commercial banks in the United States had changed.
Many foreign banks shifted from the "lending branch" model to a "funding branch" model, in which U.S.
branches of foreign banks were borrowing large amounts of U.S.
These "funding branches" went from holding 40 percent of foreign bank branch assets in the mid-1990s to holding 75 percent of foreign bank branch assets by 2009.
Foreign banks as a group moved from a position of receiving funding from their parents on a net basis in 1999 to providing significant funding to non-U.S.
A good bit of this short-term funding was used to finance long-term, U.S.
There is also evidence that a significant portion of the dollars raised by European banks in the pre-crisis period ultimately returned to the United States in the form of investments in U.S.
dollar-denominated asset-backed securities and other securities held by Europeans increased significantly between 2003 and 2007, much of it financed by the short-term, dollar-denominated liabilities of European banks.10 
Just as regulatory systems did not, in the years preceding the crisis, address vulnerabilities such as reliance on short-term wholesale funding that were created by the integration of capital markets and traditional lending, so they did not respond to the transformation of foreign banking operations.
Accordingly, just as home countries of systemically important banks have been playing catch-up on capital, liquidity, and other requirements, so host countries of very large foreign banking operations are playing catch-up in dealing with the very different character of many internationally active banks from that of 20 or 30 years ago.
In a sense, the major strengthening during the past few years of capital and liquidity requirements for internationally active banks--including the capital surcharge for banks of global systemic importance--has to date been the most important international regulatory response to the revealed vulnerabilities associated with large foreign banking operations.
Building capital and improving the liquidity positions of banks on a consolidated basis is surely a key step toward assuring the stability of major FBOs in host countries.
Of course, these agreed changes have not yet been fully implemented.
It is critical not just that all jurisdictions adopt appropriate regulations that fully incorporate the new Basel standards, but also that we ensure our banks will be substantively, and not just formally, compliant as the various transition target dates are reached.
It is also the case that there is more to be done in addressing the risks posed by large global banking organizations, including additional measures to deal with the run risks associated with short-term wholesale funding and ensuring that even the largest firms can be successfully resolved without either creating major systemic problems or requiring an infusion of public capital.
I will return to these subjects a bit later, in discussing the cooperative agenda that lies ahead for the United States, Europe, and our partners throughout the world.
First, though, I want to describe how Europe, the United Kingdom, and the United States are dealing with the vulnerabilities associated with large foreign banking operations, and thus are fulfilling their responsibilities as host-country supervisors.
I discuss the United Kingdom separately from the EU both because it is outside the euro zone and because, as a host jurisdiction, it is more similar to the United States than to other EU member states or, indeed, to any other country in the world.
The EU has not, since the crisis, specifically adjusted the structure of regulation of foreign banks by its member states in their role as host supervisors.
For more than a decade before the crisis, EU member states had prudently required that not only commercial banking, but also investment banking subsidiaries of foreign (non-EU-based) banking organizations, be subject to Basel capital requirements in the same way as EU-based firms.
With the adoption of CRD IV,11 the directive implementing the new EU capital requirements, Basel III will now be applied to all EU firms, including EU bank and investment bank subsidiaries of non-EU banking organizations.
Branches of non-EU banks are generally not subject to local requirements.
Before the crisis and the subsequent development of Basel III, there was no leverage ratio requirement in EU capital directives.
Insofar as a new leverage ratio is part of the Basel III package agreed upon internationally, one would anticipate that it will be applied to commercial banking and investment banking firms in the EU, again including local subsidiaries of non-EU firms.
Likewise, one would anticipate that the Basel III liquidity requirements will be implemented in the EU in accordance with the internationally agreed timeline and, again, that it will apply to EU subsidiaries of FBOs.
A greater challenge for the EU has been dealing with banks headquartered in one EU country but doing business in other EU countries under the "single passport," which basically allows for full access in the rest of the EU, with supervision provided only by the home country.
The most important of these changes may be the assumption by the European Central Bank of supervisory responsibility for larger euro area banks.
As a member state of the EU, the United Kingdom of course implements the EU policies I have just described.
But that country has applied an additional set of requirements on the local operations of foreign banks, particularly with respect to liquidity.
The Prudential Regulation Authority of the Bank of England applies local liquidity requirements to commercial and investment banking subsidiaries of non-U.K.
banks, requiring them to hold local buffers as determined by internal stress tests with both 14- and 90-day components.
The assumptions on which the stress tests are premised are quite strict.
affiliates with short terms that mature within the stress test period--and 100 percent outflows to non-U.K.
The requirements generated by the test are subject to a supervisory review and add-on that for some firms has resulted in a significant increase in the buffer requirement.
Branches of foreign commercial banks may in some circumstances be subject to local liquidity requirements as well.
initiative in applying local liquidity requirements is wholly understandable in light of the difficulties encountered because of stress on foreign institutions, including the Lehman bankruptcy, during the crisis.
Because London is one of the world's two largest financial center hosts, the United Kingdom is the only country other than the United States hosting numerous, very large broker-dealers that are owned by foreign banks and also a broad array of commercial bank subsidiaries and branches that are owned by foreign banks.
In fact, the six institutions headquartered outside the United States and the United Kingdom that are in the top three tiers of G-SIBs hold roughly 40 percent of their worldwide assets in those two jurisdictions.12 Thus the U.K.
initiative on liquidity and its internal debates on matters such as structural supervision, the Vickers proposals, and stress testing have all been very instructive for the Federal Reserve Board.
banking authorities in addressing the systemic vulnerabilities posed by FBOs and in fulfilling their responsibility to the rest of the world to assure the stability of one of the world's two most important financial centers.
Unlike the EU, the United States did not--prior to the financial crisis--require that all broker-dealers and investment banks meet Basel capital standards.
The legacy of the Glass-Steagall Act, which had separated investment banking from commercial banking, meant that only commercial banks were subject to the prudential regulation of the federal banking agencies.
In Europe, the dominance of universal banking, or variants thereon, led more naturally to application of capital and other prudential standards to all forms of banking activity.
Even after the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act removed the remaining barriers to affiliation between investment banks and commercial banks in the United States, Basel capital requirements applied at a consolidated level to the activities of an investment bank or broker-dealer only if it did affiliate with a commercial bank.
investment banks were generally not subject to full application of Basel capital standards.
During the crisis, the ill-advised nature of this regulatory state of affairs became apparent.
The decline in value of many mortgage-backed securities and the consequent market uncertainty as to the true value of that entire class of securities raised questions about the solvency of major broker-dealers.
Because the dealers were so highly leveraged and dependent on short-term financing, the uncertainty also led to serious liquidity strains, first at Bear Stearns and Lehman Brothers and eventually at most dealers--domestic and foreign owned.
Bear Stearns and Merrill Lynch were acquired by existing bank holding companies after coming close to failure.
Through its Primary Dealer Credit Facility, the Federal Reserve provided substantial liquidity to the broker-dealer affiliates of the bank holding companies, as well as to the primary dealer subsidiaries of foreign banks.
At the same time, the shift in strategy of many foreign banks toward using their U.S.
branches to raise dollars in short-term markets for lending around the world created another set of vulnerabilities that resulted in substantial and, relative to total assets, disproportionate use of the Federal Reserve's discount window by foreign bank branches.
The experience of the crisis made clear, first, that the perimeter of prudential regulation around U.S.
The Dodd-Frank Act has given a legal foundation for this change, first by mandating that Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley will remain subject to consolidated prudential regulation even were they to divest their insured depository institutions and, second, by giving the Financial Stability Oversight Council the authority to designate other financial firms as systemically important, a step that would place them under Federal Reserve regulation and supervision.
Dodd-Frank further required the Federal Reserve to apply progressively more stringent prudential regulation to bank holding companies with more than $50 billion in assets.
Congress also required the Federal Reserve to apply special prudential standards to large FBOs.
Under our recently finalized Section 165 enhanced prudential standards regulation, an FBO with U.S.
non-branch assets of $50 billion or more must hold its U.S.
subsidiaries under an intermediate holding company (IHC), which must meet the risk-based and leverage capital standards generally applicable to bank holding companies under U.S.
law.13 Such an FBO must also certify that it meets consolidated capital adequacy standards established by its home-country supervisor that are consistent with the Basel Capital Framework.
assets of $50 billion or more must also meet liquidity risk-management standards and conduct internal liquidity stress tests.
The IHC must maintain a liquidity buffer in the United States for a 30-day liquidity stress test.
branches and agencies of an FBO must maintain a liquidity buffer in the United States equal to the liquidity needs for 14 days, as determined by a 30-day liquidity stress test.14 The IHCs of FBOs must also conform to certain risk-management and supervisory requirements at the IHC level.
capital requirements for FBOs are similar to those that apply to foreign banks in the EU.
That is, generally applicable Basel capital requirements are applied to the U.S.
rules are somewhat more favorable to foreign institutions, in that they only apply once the non-branch U.S.
That dollar amount, incidentally, is the same as the Dodd-Frank threshold for more stringent prudential measures, though note that this statutory threshold applies if the total assets of any U.S.
As in the EU, the capital requirements do not apply to U.S.
branches of foreign banks, even though the crisis experience provides some credible arguments for doing so.
banks are not subject to leverage ratios for their local operations.
It is true that many foreign countries--including the EU member states--do not currently have leverage ratio standards for their banks.
leverage ratio requirement for foreign firms will be phased in more slowly than originally proposed, so as to align it more closely with the effective date of the Basel III leverage ratio requirement.
A second complaint is that there is something unfair about the United States requiring an FBO to meet the international leverage ratio in its U.S.
operations, because its operations may be heavily weighted toward broker-dealer activities, which generally have higher leverage, whereas the leverage ratio for U.S.
firms could be subject to a similar ratio requirement abroad as countries implement their Basel III commitments.
However, quite apart from what may happen in the future, there are two U.S.-based firms--Goldman Sachs and Morgan Stanley--whose global business mix resembles that of the U.S.
subsidiaries of FBOs that are predominantly engaged in broker-dealer activities in the United States.
In fact, under the enhanced supplementary leverage ratio the Board proposed during the summer, these and other U.S.
The applicable liquidity requirements, while somewhat differently defined, are roughly comparable to those already applicable to FBOs in the United Kingdom.
The similar positions of our two nations as host countries for foreign bank operations heavily involved in trading and significantly reliant on potentially runnable short-term wholesale funding explain this rough parallelism.
practice lies in the IHC requirement for foreign banks with large domestic operations.
financial regulation that is a legacy of Glass-Steagall, as well as the efforts by a small number of very large foreign banks to evade the intent of Congress that capital standards apply to their U.S.
It is unclear how much difference this makes for the capital requirements of FBOs in the United States as opposed, say, to those of U.S.
That would depend on the existence and size of financial affiliates owned by the U.S.
In any case, it seems sound prudential practice--and consistent with the various Basel Committee principles to which I earlier referred--that large domestic operations of foreign banks meet capital standards on the basis of all exposures in the host jurisdiction and, indeed, that they manage their risks in that country across all their affiliates.
To return to the issue of Balkanization, three things should now be apparent.
First, in its new capital regulations applicable to FBOs, the United States is more a follower of the pattern set by the EU than it is an initiator of new kinds of requirements.
Of course, a few foreign banks would prefer the old system under which they held relatively little capital in their very extensive U.S.
But that was neither safe for the financial system nor particularly fair to their competitors--U.S.
Indeed, a firm that is genuinely well capitalized, including holding the G-SIB surcharge at its global consolidated level, should require only moderate adjustment efforts during the transition period established in the FBO rule.
Second, there is considerable scope for a foreign bank to integrate its U.S.
operations with its global activities within the rule the Federal Reserve adopted last month.
For example, while foreign firms with more than $10 billion in non-branch assets have some additional reporting requirements, only when U.S.
non-branch assets rise above $50 billion do the quantitative Basel capital requirements become applicable to the U.S.
Moreover, no capital requirements apply to branches so long as their parent is subject to home-country consolidated capital rules consistent with Basel standards.
Third, the capital and liquidity requirements that do apply are wholly consistent with the responsibility of host-country supervisors to assure financial stability in their own markets.
Collectively, foreign banks with a large presence in the United States conduct activities of a scope, and at a scale, that could lead to problems for the U.S.
Realistically, exposures and vulnerabilities in a large host-country market are much more difficult for home-country supervisors to assess.
financial institutions to enhance the effective consolidated supervision and regulation for which we are responsible.
First, our FBO capital requirements, like those of the EU for foreign commercial and investment banks, are based on the capital rules agreed to in the Basel Committee.15 Thus, there is an overall compatibility between national and international rules with respect to applicable definitions, standards, and required ratios.
Second, home countries must implement and enforce faithfully at a consolidated level these same capital rules.
More broadly, home-country supervisory expectations for strong consolidated capital levels, liquidity positions, and risk-management practices are likely to facilitate compliance with domestic requirements for large FBOs of the sort applicable in the United States and the EU.
It is also important that home countries assure the credibility of resolution mechanisms for their large banking organizations.
This task entails the implementation of the Financial Stability Board's principles for effective resolution regimes, including establishing a resolution authority with adequate legal powers to manage the process in an orderly fashion without injection of public capital.16 It also includes requiring each such institution to have total loss absorption capacity sufficient to recapitalize the firm even if its substantial equity buffer is lost in an extreme tail event.
Home and host countries should work together toward international standards that will ensure that an appropriate amount of this capacity would be available to host authorities faced with the potential insolvency of large FBOs in their jurisdiction or with the consequences for their market of the failure of parent banks.
In this regard, I think that capital requirements for FBOs of the sort now required by the EU and the United States are very likely to reduce the considerable strains that have traditionally accompanied financial distress at global banking firms.
In most cases, including both internationally and within the EU itself in recent years, stress has resulted in the demand by host authorities for ex post ring fencing of capital, liquidity, or both, often in the absence of any ex ante requirements.
The existence of FBO capital and liquidity standards, particularly if supplemented with the total loss absorbency measures to which I just referred, should mitigate the need for such demands, which of course come at the worst possible time for the firm trying to meet them.
Third, we--by which I mean both home and major host banking regulators--need to find better ways of fostering genuine regulatory and supervisory cooperation.
Particularly at the most senior levels of the agencies that actually supervise globally active banks, our interactions with our counterparts from other countries have become almost exclusively focused on developing international standards or reviewing compliance with existing ones.
As important as these efforts have been, and continue to be, following the crisis, there is a risk that by not having opportunities for senior officials of the various national agencies that have direct supervisory responsibility for banking organizations to meet and discuss shared challenges, we give short shrift to the collective interest of bank regulators in effective supervision of all globally active firms.
Proposals to include prudential requirements or, more precisely, to include limitations on prudential requirements in trade agreements would lead us farther away from the aforementioned goal of emphasizing shared financial stability interests, in favor of an approach to prudential matters informed principally by considerations of commercial advantage.
The job is made only harder by the fact that these firms cross borders in ways their regulators do not.
But we cannot ignore this fact and pretend that we have global oversight.
International standards for prudential regulation are not the same as global regulations, and consolidated supervision is not the same as comprehensive supervision.
The most important contribution the United States can make to global financial stability is to ensure the stability of our own financial system.
There must be some assurance beyond mere words from parent banks or home-country supervisors that a large FBO will remain strong or supported in periods of stress.
After all, as we saw in the crisis, while a parent bank or home-country authorities may have offered those words with total good faith in calm times, they may be unable to carry through on them in more financially turbulent periods.
On the contrary, these very circumstances call not only for more tangible safeguards in host countries, but also for more genuine cooperation among supervisory authorities.
Indeed, as I hope will continue to be the case with the international agenda on resolution, total loss absorbency, and related matters, we should aspire to converge around the kinds of protections that we can expect at both consolidated and local levels.

I would add, in passing, the observation that I am not at all sure it would be desirable to have a single global bank regulator even if it were remotely within the realm of political possibility.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1983), "Principles for the Supervision of Banks' Foreign Establishments (PDF)" (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, May).
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (1992), "Minimum Standards for Supervision of International Banking Groups and Their Cross-Border Establishments (PDF)" (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, July).
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2012), "Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision (PDF)" (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, September), p.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2006), "International Convergence of Capital Measures and Capital Standards (PDF)" (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, June), p.
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2012), "A Framework for Dealing with Domestic Systemically Important Banks (PDF)" (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, October).
As of September 30, 2013, there were 24 such foreign banks, compared with 24 U.S.
bank holding companies: FR Y-9C; for foreign banks: FR Y-9C, FFIEC 002, FR 2886b, FFIEC 031/041, FR Y-7N/NS, X-17A-5 Part II, and X-17A-5 Part IIA, and X-17A-5 Part II CSE.
Bernanke, Carol Bertaut, Laurie Pounder DeMarco, and Steven Kamin (2011), "International Capital Flows and the Returns to Safe Assets in the United States, 2003-2007," International Finance Discussion Papers Number 1014 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February).
The European CRD IV package, which implemented the global Basel III capital standards into EU law, entered into force on July 17, 2013.
Staff estimates, using data from the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England.
Actually, FBOs need not meet advanced approach risk-based capital requirements in the United States, unless they specifically opt in to that treatment.
An FBO with total consolidated assets of $50 billion or more but with combined U.S.
assets of less than $50 billion must report the results of an internal liquidity stress test (either on a consolidated basis or for its combined U.S.
As a technical matter, the relevant FBOs are subject to the traditional 4 percent U.S.
leverage ratio, but it is very likely that this requirement will be less binding than the 3 percent international leverage ratio because of the inclusion in the denominator of the latter of off-balance-sheet activities and exposures.
Financial Stability Board (2011), "Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions" (Basel: Financial Stability Board, November 4).

March 8, 1911 was the first International Women's Day, and it was 1980 when President Carter established National Women's History Week.
But I am glad that there is, each year, a time when we pause to think about the role of women, because history is more than simply what happened, and more than what women and men did to make it happen.
Starting with gaining the vote, just a few years before International Women's Day, "The American Century," as it's sometimes known, was also a century of progress for women.
Fundamental to our country's values, to those ideals that have been and continue to be so influential around the world, is the principle of equality for all, including for women.
One reason America's example is influential elsewhere is because progress toward these ideals has been accompanied by great success in broadly raising living standards.
And I think our economic success has been due in substantial part to the fuller participation and contribution of women to the economy.
If I were to apply this lesson, I would hope that our nation continues to reap the benefits of greater participation by women in the economy and that we do everything that we can to foster that participation.
I hope we continue to seek this understanding, in my field and others where women are in the minority, because the benefits of greater participation for women, it seems to me, are clear and substantial.
As we continue to make progress in recovering from the Great Recession, our country is going to need the best efforts, ideas and talent it can muster to succeed in an increasingly competitive global economy.

At the Crowdfunding for Community Development Finance Conference, Washington, D.C.
Let me start by welcoming everyone to the Federal Reserve.
Today's topic of crowdfunding for community development finance is an important and topical one, and I want to thank you all for helping us think through the challenges and opportunities presented by this new technology as it relates to raising funds for local communities.
First, in many communities, traditional resources for community development are shrinking, and the field is actively seeking to identify new sources of funding.
Second, the Securities and Exchange Commission recently released its proposed rule under the Jumpstart Our Business Startups--or JOBS--Act, which is likely to influence the environment for crowdfunding in general and for community development finance specifically.
The question for today is whether this power of the crowd can be harnessed to support community development, a field that has not widely benefitted from crowdfunding thus far.
While crowdfunding may not be as well known in the community development context, there are, in fact, existing models of crowdfunding for community development that we can learn from.
This is an interesting one because Calvert Foundation was essentially doing something akin to crowdfunding for community development before Internet platforms became available.
As you may know, Calvert Foundation is a certified Community Development Financial Institution (CDFI) that was established in 1988 as a 501(c)3 when Calvert Investments found strong interest among its clients to invest directly in underserved communities.
Since 1995, 13,000 people have invested in these notes, which provide a financial return while economically empowering communities.2 According to Calvert Foundation, these 13,000 individual investments have collectively helped to create 430,000 jobs for low-income individuals, built or rehabilitated 17,000 affordable homes, and financed close to 26,000 nonprofit facilities and social enterprises.3 Both the Fundrise and Calvert Foundation examples hint at the potential of scaling up crowdfunding for community development.
Many of you may be wondering, "Why is the Fed interested in this topic?" First, at a fundamental level, it's important for us to keep our finger on the pulse of financial innovation and the changing dynamics of the financial services industry--even in those parts of the industry where we do not have a direct regulatory role.
We know that financial innovation can offer both opportunities and pitfalls; by carefully and even-handedly studying each new product or service at an early stage in its lifecycle, we can hope to better understand both the potential benefits, as well as any risks for adverse impacts on households and communities.
Also, through convenings like today's event and by sharing promising practices, the Federal Reserve System has a longstanding history of supporting local and regional community and economic development efforts that contribute to economic growth and employment.
To the extent that crowdfunding has the potential to bring new capital into low- and moderate-income communities, we want to be involved in helping the learning process along.
However, there may be ways that this new form of fundraising can be adapted to community development investing.

At the International Research Forum on Monetary Policy, Washington, D.C.
Governor Stein presented identical remarks at the International Monetary Fund 2014 Spring Meetings on April 13, 2014, and at the 2014 Financial Markets Conference on April 16, 2014.
I would like to talk today about how one might explicitly incorporate financial stability considerations into a monetary policy framework.1 Doing so involves tackling two questions--one that is relatively easy and one that is much harder.
The easier question is, should financial stability concerns, in principle, influence monetary policy decisions? To be specific, are there cases in which one might tolerate a larger forecast shortfall of the path of the unemployment rate from its full-employment level than one would otherwise, because of a concern that a more accommodative policy might entail a heightened risk of some sort of adverse financial market outcome? This question is about theory, not empirical magnitudes, and, in my view, the theoretical answer is a clear "yes." I will say a bit more about why shortly, but let me stress that I am not breaking any new conceptual ground here; the basic argument has been laid out by a number of others, including Woodford and Kocherlakota.2 
The second question is, how does one operationalize the theory? What sorts of data should one look to, and what sorts of empirical methods should one use, to calibrate by how much the stance of monetary policy should be altered relative to the case in which financial stability considerations are completely set aside? This question is very difficult.
While I hope to convince you that this path is worth exploring, I cannot say that I know yet exactly where it will lead--and, in particular, whether it will ultimately deliver monetary policy prescriptions that differ in a quantitatively meaningful way from those offered by our current models.
I am going to try to make the case that, all else being equal, monetary policy should be less accommodative--by which I mean that it should be willing to tolerate a larger forecast shortfall of the path of the unemployment rate from its full-employment level--when estimates of risk premiums in the bond market are abnormally low.
These risk premiums include the term premium on Treasury securities, as well as the expected returns to investors from bearing the credit risk on, for example, corporate bonds and asset-backed securities.
As an illustration, consider the period in the spring of 2013 when the 10-year Treasury yield was in the neighborhood of 1.60 percent and estimates of the term premium were around negative 80 basis points.3 Applied to this period, my approach would suggest a lesser willingness to use large-scale asset purchases to push yields down even further, as compared with a scenario in which term premiums were not so low.4 
The informal intuition I have in mind is that there is a cost associated with pushing risk premiums too low, because doing so increases the likelihood that they may revert back in a way that hinders the Federal Reserve's ability to achieve its mandated objectives.
Do Financial Stability Considerations Belong in a Monetary Policy Framework?
However, let me start with the conceptual question of whether financial stability considerations belong at all in a monetary policy framework.
First, suppose that the Federal Reserve focuses only on its traditional dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability.
To keep things simple, suppose further that these two goals are not in conflict with one another--say, because aggregate demand is weak, depressing both employment and inflation--so that we can boil things down to one objective: keeping unemployment close to target.
With the usual quadratic loss objective function, this assumption would say that the Federal Reserve cares about minimizing the expected value of (U – U*)2.
A little bit of algebra shows that this objective function can in turn be decomposed into two pieces: (1) an "expected shortfall" term, given by the squared deviation of expected unemployment from the target level of U*; and (2) a "risk" term, given by the variance of realized unemployment, U.5 
Second, the argument assumes that there is some variable summarizing financial market vulnerability--I will be abstract for the moment and just call it FMV--which is influenced by monetary policy.
That is, easier monetary policy leads to increased vulnerability as measured by FMV.
Moreover, when FMV is elevated, there is a greater probability of an adverse event--some kind of financial market shock--that, if it were to occur, would push up the unemployment rate, all else being equal.6 
These imperfections could stem from regulatory arbitrage; political-economy constraints; or the fact that too much regulation can also impede economic growth, just like overly restrictive monetary policy.7 Thus one way to think of my construct of FMV is that it is a stand-in for the level of financial vulnerabilities that remain after regulation has done the best that it can do, given the existing real-world limitations.
In this setting, even with inflation concerns entirely set aside, monetary policy faces a tradeoff.
A more accommodative policy has the usual benefit of lowering expected unemployment and thus reducing the expected shortfall term in the objective function.If, however, it also raises the conditional variance of the unemployment rate via an elevated-FMV channel--thereby increasing the risk term in the objective function--then there is a cost to be weighed alongside the benefit.
And importantly, this is true even when financial stability is not a separate objective in and of itself; as I have framed it, financial stability matters only insofar as it affects the degree of risk around the employment leg of the Federal Reserve's mandate.8 
To be sure, absent a concrete measure of FMV, as well as some sense of the responsiveness of FMV to monetary policy, this discussion is all pretty theoretical and non-operational.
In making the tradeoff I just described, the marginal benefit of using easier policy to reduce the expected unemployment gap is greater when the gap itself is large--that is, when unemployment is far above target.
In this case, even a quite high level of financial vulnerability may not imply a much different stance of monetary policy than would fall out of a more traditional analysis.
However, as the unemployment gap shrinks, financial stability risks loom larger in relative terms, so an analysis that takes them on board may lead to more of an adjustment in the stance of policy.
When it gets down to implementation, Woodford suggests that the most natural measure of financial market vulnerability is a variable that captures "leverage in the financial sector." In other words, faced with unemployment above target, he would have monetary policy be less accommodative, all else being equal, when financial-sector leverage is high.
Second, easy monetary policy is asserted to increase the incentives for the financial sector to lever up.
And, third, focusing on leverage as opposed to asset prices avoids putting the central bank in the position of having to "spot bubbles": Even if it is impossible for the central bank to know when an asset class is overvalued, the risks to the economy associated with overvaluation are presumably greater when intermediaries are highly levered.9 
In my view, these are generally sensible arguments, and an approach of the sort that Woodford outlines may well turn out to be fruitful.
At the same time, this leverage-centric approach also has some drawbacks, which suggest that there is likely to be value in a parallel exploration of other tracks.
For one thing, the effective degree of leverage in the financial system is not easy to measure in a comprehensive fashion.
One can certainly look at things like banks' capital ratios, but some of the important action, from a financial stability perspective, is likely to be in subtler forms of leverage that are either outside of the traditional banking sector or more prone to shape shifting.
More to the point, recall that, for the purposes of informing monetary policy, one wants to focus on those sources of financial vulnerability that are least effectively dealt with via regulation.
And the more reliably a form of leverage can be measured, the better a candidate it is for being handled with a regulatory or supervisory approach.
In other words, if we were to see signs that banks' capital ratios were in danger of eroding, we would certainly want to do something, but it is hard for me to imagine that the something should involve monetary policy--the obvious first line of defense in this case would be to turn to our regulatory and supervisory tools.
In response to this critique, one might instead seek to focus the attention of monetary policymakers on broader measures of private-sector leverage that are outside the reach of traditional financial regulation.
For example, Borio and Drehmann document that the ratio of credit to the private nonfinancial sector relative to gross domestic product (GDP), once suitably detrended, has substantial predictive power for financial crises, so perhaps it might make sense for monetary policy to condition on this kind of broad credit-to-GDP ratio.10 However, if one goes this route, another measurement challenge arises: How, if at all, does monetary policy influence the evolution of the ratio? Without an answer to this question, it is hard to say how much one would want to alter the stance of policy when, say, the ratio is abnormally high relative to trend.
And the measurement problem is likely to be a difficult one, given that the credit-to-GDP ratio is a slow-moving variable: Unlike with asset prices, there is no scope for doing an event-study analysis of the effect of a change in policy on the item of interest.11 
Motivated in part by these observations, I would like to spend the rest of this talk exploring an alternative, albeit potentially complementary, approach to the problem.
Rather than focusing primarily on some measure of intermediary leverage as an input into the monetary policy framework, my suggestion is to also look at estimates of risk premiums in the bond market.
This is, of course, not to suggest that shocks to large leveraged intermediaries are not as important--if not more so--as those that play out primarily in capital markets.
Rather, the premise is simply that disruptions originating in the capital market can be of consequence in their own right, and that they may be less amenable to being dealt with via financial regulation.
Let me start by being clear on terminology: By the "risk premium" on an asset category, I mean the ex ante expected return, based on an objective statistical model, that an investor can anticipate earning on the asset in excess of that on short-term Treasury bills.
And, for the sake of concreteness, I will focus on two of these bond market risk premiums in particular: the so-called term premium, which is the expected excess return on longer-term Treasury bonds relative to short-term bills, and the credit risk premium, which is the expected excess return on bonds with credit risk (for example, corporate bonds, or asset-backed securities) relative to safe Treasury securities.
With all of the rhetorical heat that gets generated about whether the Federal Reserve can or should try to spot bubbles, it is worth keeping some uncontroversial facts in mind.
It is widely accepted among researchers in finance that there is an economically large amount of predictable variation in the risk premiums on a wide range of assets classes.13 For example, Cochrane and Piazzesi document that the excess returns on longer-term Treasury securities can be predicted one year ahead with a simple model that delivers an R-squared in excess of 40 percent.14 Analogously, Greenwood and Hanson show that the returns on junk bonds relative to Treasury securities over two- to three-year horizons can also be forecast with R-squared values in the ballpark of 30 to 40 percent, in this case by using two intuitively appealing forecasting variables: credit spreads and the high-yield share, which is the fraction of total bond issuance that comes from the high-yield category.15 Figure 1 illustrates the time-series variation in estimates of both of these risk premiums.
Here is where one can get into hard-to-resolve debates about bubble spotting and about whether one can expect the Federal Reserve to be smarter than other market participants.
In particular, the implications for monetary policy that I have in mind do not seem to depend critically on the difficult question of why there is so much time variation in expected bond market returns; they only require that this variation exists, as we know it does.
So let's stipulate that risk premiums in the bond market move around a lot.
The next observation to throw into the mix is that monetary policy is one of the factors that have an important influence on these movements.
An emerging body of empirical work finds that an easing of monetary policy--even via conventional policy tools in normal times--tends to reduce both the term premiums on long-term Treasury securities and the credit spreads on corporate bonds.17 That is, monetary policy always tends to work in part through its effect on capital market risk premiums, perhaps through a risk-taking or reaching-for-yield mechanism.18 
However, while this empirical observation sheds some interesting light on how monetary policy influences the real economy, it does not by itself suggest that there is any financial stability dark side--that is, any meaningful increase in what I have been calling FMV--to the lowered risk premiums that go with monetary accommodation.
For there to be such a dark side, there would have to be some sort of asymmetry in the unwinding of the effects of monetary policy on these risk premiums, whereby the eventual reversal either happens more abruptly, or causes larger economic effects, than the initial compression.
Suppose that initially, the credit risk premium on high-yield bonds is 400 basis points, and that, because the unemployment rate is well above target, the Federal Reserve wants to add monetary accommodation.
Suppose further that doing so lowers the credit risk premium to 200 basis points temporarily but also increases the odds that this risk premium will, at some point in the next couple of years, revert sharply, moving back in the direction of 400 basis points.
What is the downside here? Given a desire for accommodation, is it not better to have credit risk premiums pushed down to a lower on-average level, even if that potentially involves a more volatile down-then-up path? Again, the answer depends critically on whether there is some kind of asymmetry, whereby the eventual increase in spreads either is more abrupt, or has a larger effect on the real economy, than the initial compression.
To do so, I build directly on recent work by Gilchrist and Zakrajsek (hereafter, GZ).19 GZ show that changes in credit risk premiums have substantial predictive power for measures of economic activity like GDP and unemployment.
The EBP at any point in time is, roughly speaking, a measure of marketwide credit spreads minus an estimate of the expected default losses on bonds.
Hence, it can be thought of as a proxy for the excess return that bondholders can expect to earn, net of defaults, on a going-forward basis--very much in the spirit of the risk premium concept to which I have been referring.
Moreover, in simple forecasting regressions, changes in the EBP are associated with significant movements in GDP and unemployment one year later.
In other words, an increase in the EBP--that is, a widening of the non-default-related component of credit spreads--portends a decline in economic activity and employment a year later.
In table 1 and figure 2, I look explicitly for asymmetries, with a specification that allows an upward move in the EBP to have a different effect on the economy than a downward move.
Upward moves in EBP--again, those corresponding to a widening of credit spreads--are very informative about the future evolution of the real economy.
The coefficient estimates imply that an increase of 50 basis points in the EBP in a single quarter, which is roughly a once-every-five-years kind of move, is associated with a two percentage point slowing of GDP growth over the next four quarters and slightly more than a one percentage point increase in the unemployment rate over the same interval.20 These effects are, by any standard, economically important.
By contrast, declines in the EBP have no discernible effect at all on economic activity.
Putting it all together, this reasoning suggests that the credit risk premium--as measured, say, by a forecasting model like that of Greenwood and Hanson--may be an operationally useful measure of financial market vulnerability.
When this risk premium is low, there is a greater probability of a subsequent upward spike in credit spreads and the EBP.
Moreover, such upward spikes, when they do occur, are associated with significant adverse economic effects.
To be clear, we are not necessarily talking about once-in-a-generation financial crises here, with major financial institutions teetering on the brink of failure.
Nevertheless, the evidence suggests that even more modest capital market disruptions may have consequences that are large enough to warrant consideration when formulating monetary policy.
If so, the indicated directional adjustment would be to be less aggressive in providing monetary accommodation in the face of above-target unemployment, all else being equal, when risk premiums are abnormally low.
Foremost among them is the fact that the ability of increases in the EBP to predict future economic activity may not reflect a causal link from the former to the latter.
Perhaps there are economic slowdowns that are caused entirely by nonfinancial factors, and, when investors see one on the horizon, they get skittish, causing the EBP to rise.
If so, it would be wrong to conclude that easy monetary policy--even if it does, in fact, cause lower risk premiums--has any causal effect on the probability of a future slowdown.
Making progress on these difficult issues of causality will likely require a clearer articulation of the underlying mechanism that leads to such pronounced asymmetries in the relationship between credit spreads and economic activity.
If a causal link is, indeed, present, what is there about it that leads increases in spreads to have a much stronger effect on the economy than decreases? I suspect that the answer has to do with something that mimics the effect of leveraged losses to financial intermediaries--and the attendant effect on credit supply.
For example, GZ document that their EBP measure is closely correlated with the credit default swap spreads of broker-dealer firms.
The reason could be that losses on their inventories of risky bonds erode the capital positions of these firms, which might in turn compromise their ability to provide valuable intermediation services.
Alternatively, a similar mechanism may play out with open-end bond funds, whereby losses cause large outflows of assets under management, again compromising the intermediation function and aggregate credit supply.21 
To restate my main point, I believe that measures of bond market risk premiums--for example, estimates of the expected excess returns on long-term Treasury securities relative to Treasury bills and on credit-risky bonds relative to Treasury securities--may turn out to be useful inputs into the monetary policy framework.
These variables have the potential to serve as simple proxies for a particular sort of financial market vulnerability that may not be easily addressed by supervision and regulation.
Thus, at this early stage, I would not want to claim that one is likely to get policy prescriptions that differ significantly from those of our standard models.
As I noted earlier, one of the central and most widely shared ideas in the academic finance literature is the importance of time variation in the risk premiums (or expected returns) on a wide range of assets.
At the same time, canonical macro models in the New Keynesian genre of the sort that are often used to inform monetary policy tend to exhibit little or no meaningful risk premium variation.22 Even if most of the specifics of what I have had to say in this talk turn out to be off base, I have to believe that our macro models will ultimately be more useful as a guide to policy if they build on a more empirically realistic foundation with respect to the behavior of interest rates and credit spreads.
"Changes in Bank Lending Standards and the Macroeconomy," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations," American Economic Review, vol.
"Assessing the Risk of Banking Crises--Revisited," BIS Quarterly Review, March, pp.
"The Unreliability of Credit-to-GDP Ratio Gaps in Real Time: Implications for Countercyclical Capital Buffers," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"Market Tantrums and Monetary Policy," paper presented at the 2014 U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, a conference sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, February 28.
"Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs, and Economic Activity (PDF)," working paper, October.
"Monetary Policy and Real Borrowing Costs at the Zero Lower Bound," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-03.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December 2013.
"Credit Spreads and Business Cycle Fluctuations," American Economic Review, vol.
"Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-46.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Low Real Interest Rates," speech delivered at the 22nd Annual Hyman P.
"Discussion of 2014 USMPF Monetary Policy Report," speech delivered at the U.S.
Monetary Policy Forum, a conference sponsored by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Booth School of Business, held in New York, February 28.
"Overheating in Credit Markets: Origins, Measurement, and Policy Responses," speech delivered at "Restoring Household Financial Stability after the Great Recession: Why Household Balance Sheets Matter," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
"Monetary Policy and Financial Stability," speech delivered at the 30th Annual National Association for Business Economics Economic Policy Conference, Arlington, Va., February 25.
 The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee.
 The 10-year nominal rate hit 1.63 percent on May 2, 2013.
 Again, I stress that this statement is directional, not quantitative--I am not claiming that the magnitude of the adjustment one would want to make is large, or that the policy we had in place at the time was miscalibrated in any absolute sense.
Rather, my point is just that the financial stability costs of asset purchases are likely to loom larger when term premiums are more negative, and that this consideration belongs in the discussion.
 Kocherlakota (2014) emphasizes the same decomposition of the Federal Reserve's loss function.
Note that, in focusing only on mean and variance, this functional form sets aside what may be another important aspect of vulnerabilities: tail risks that are not well captured in variance as opposed to higher moments.
 If I had introduced an explicit time dimension, it might be more natural to assume that easier monetary policy today raises the probability of an adverse event at some medium-run future date, even while reducing the probability in the short run.
In this case, there might be an interesting set of intertemporal tradeoffs to be considered, particularly if the economy were in a very vulnerable position today.
 Woodford (2012) writes, "It is important, I believe, to realize that the real issue is not identifying whether one type of asset or another is currently overvalued.
Instead, what central banks (and potentially other ‘macro-prudential' regulators) need to be able to monitor is the degree to which the positions taken by leveraged institutions pose a risk to financial stability.
A central bank need not be able to identify asset over-valuations in order to recognize situations in which the probability of simultaneous financial distress at several institutions is non-trivial." Return to text
An example would be limits on the loan-to-value ratios of all mortgage loans, irrespective of whether they reside on bank balance sheets.
 This statement admittedly sweeps some important subtleties under the rug.
More precisely, I suspect that, if one takes the Federal Reserve's legal mandate as given--and, more specifically, takes as given an objective function such as minimizing the expected value of (U – U*)2--then one can remain agnostic about the source of variation in risk premiums and still reach the kinds of conclusions that I do in what follows.
For example, I would conjecture that it might be more normatively appropriate, holding fixed the consequences for aggregate activity and unemployment, to lean against a sharp reduction in risk premiums that is driven by investor sentiment rather than against one that is driven by a rational response to changes in the risk environment.
 Note that, as an econometric matter, it is easier to establish a causal effect of monetary policy on risk premiums than on broad measures of leverage, because asset prices can be measured on a daily or even intraday basis.
So they can be directly related to innovations in the stance of policy, as proxied for by, for example, movements in short-term rates in the wake of an announcement by the Federal Open Market Committee.
A similar identification strategy is not available for linking monetary policy changes to movements in, say, nonfinancial-sector leverage, given that the latter is measured infrequently.
 Basset and others (2014) document that changes in the EBP are associated with significant changes in bank lending standards, which suggests a broader pullback in the credit intermediation process.
 This is true even of those models that--following in the tradition of Bernanke and Gertler (1989)--incorporate some form of financial market friction.
Typically, the friction is modeled as something that effectively changes the expected cash flows associated with financial intermediation, but not the net-of-default risk premium earned by investors.


Thank you Dan, and thank you to everyone gathered here and others throughout the System who are listening in.
To members of Congress, Secretary Lew and others from the administration and fellow financial regulatory agencies who are with us today, welcome to the Federal Reserve.
I want to particularly thank President Obama for the honor of being asked to lead the Federal Reserve and carry on its important work.
When I accepted his offer, I promised the president I would do my very best, working with my Fed colleagues, to help restore the health of the economy and promote a strong and stable financial system.
I am repeating this promise, in this distinguished company and to all others listening because that is what this ceremony is about.
The oath I have affirmed, identical to the one taken by everyone serving the Federal Reserve, is a public promise to carry out my duties guided by no interest other than the public's interest.
In that short time, the Board has taken significant steps to further strengthen financial regulation, and I have discharged one of my most important responsibilities, accounting for the Fed's actions and explaining its policies in our semi-annual report to Congress.
I'll do more of that explaining in two weeks, when I respond to questions from the media after the next meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee.

Such communication is vital in a democracy and especially important for the Federal Reserve, which relies on the confidence of the public to be effective in carrying out its mission.
Chairman Bernanke initiated press conferences in 2011 as one of a number of steps to make the Federal Reserve more transparent and accountable, and I promise to build on his legacy.
The economy is stronger and the financial system is sounder.
I will also continue the work of helping repair the damage done by the financial crisis to the economy.
The goals set by Congress for the Federal Reserve are clear: maximum employment and stable prices.
It is equally clear that the economy continues to operate considerably short of these objectives.
I promise to do all that I can, working with my fellow policymakers, to achieve the very important goals Congress has assigned to the Federal Reserve.
I take up these challenges aided by the immensely skilled, talented, and dedicated men and women who comprise the Federal Reserve's staff.
And their knowledge, analysis and judgment will be indispensable in fulfilling the mission of the Federal Reserve in the years ahead.

The tools we deploy, to guide the financial system and influence our vast economy, can seem far removed from the lives and concerns of average Americans.
The unemployment rate represents millions of individuals who are eager to work but struggling to provide for themselves and their families.



I am delighted to have the opportunity to discuss the paper "Market Tantrums and Monetary Policy." It is timely, provocative, and extremely insightful.
Let me start by summarizing what I take to be the paper's main messages.1 First, the authors argue that policymakers should pay careful attention not just to measures of leverage in the banking and shadow banking sectors, but also to the financial stability risks that might arise from the behavior of unlevered asset managers, such as those running various types of bond funds.
Second, the authors develop a model of agency problems in delegated asset management, according to which an environment of low short-term rates can encourage asset managers concerned with their relative performance rankings to "reach for yield," which in turn acts to compress risk premiums.
Moreover, the model has the feature that this reach for yield can end badly, with a sudden and sharp correction in risk premiums that arises endogenously in response to a small tightening of monetary policy.
The events of the spring and summer of 2013, when there was a rapid rise in bond market term premiums, are cited as a leading example of what the model sets out to capture.
Third, the authors assert that the conventional regulatory toolkit, which is largely designed to contain intermediary leverage, is not well suited to dealing with the asset-management sector.
Given this limitation of regulation, and because monetary policy has a direct influence on the behavior of asset managers, the financial stability risks that these managers create should be factored into the design and conduct of monetary policy.
Presumably, this consideration would imply that monetary policy should be somewhat less easy in a weak economy, all else being equal, to reduce the probability of an undesirable upward spike in rates and credit spreads down the road.
The authors are careful to note that "our analysis neither invalidates nor validates the course the Federal Reserve has actually taken."2 Rather, they are highlighting a set of considerations that they believe should ultimately be incorporated into the design of a monetary policy framework.
This is the spirit in which I will discuss the paper--not as a comment on the current stance of policy, but as an exploration of the factors that should be taken into account when thinking about the tradeoffs associated with monetary policy more generally.
In particular, here is how I think about the value-added of the theory:On the one hand, an emerging body of empirical work documents that an easing of monetary policy--even via conventional policy tools in normal times--tends to reduce both the term premiums on long-term Treasury bonds and the credit spreads on corporate bonds.3 That is, monetary policy tends to work in part through its effect on capital market risk premiums, perhaps through some sort of risk-taking or reaching-for-yield mechanism.
On the other hand, while this empirical observation sheds some interesting light on how monetary policy influences the real economy, it does not by itself suggest that there is any financial stability dark side to the lowered risk premiums that go with monetary accommodation.
For there to be any meaningful tradeoff, there would have to be some sort of asymmetry in the unwinding of these risk premiums, whereby the eventual reversal either happens more abruptly, or causes larger economic effects, than the initial compression.
Said a little differently, if an easing of Federal Reserve policy puts downward pressure on term premiums and credit spreads, and if this downward pressure is only gradually reversed as policy begins to tighten, then what is the problem?
That is, it features a gradual compression of risk spreads during a period of monetary ease, and then, when policy begins to tighten, it delivers a sharp and abrupt correction, driven by a particular form of market dynamics.
I don't know of any evidence that bears on this hypothesis in the bond market, though an analogous pattern does appear in stock market returns.4 
While appearing in a different guise here, this strategic-complementarity effect--the idea that any one agent is in more of a rush to get out when he or she thinks that others may also want to get out--is essentially the same mechanism that drives bank runs in the classic work of Diamond and Dybvig, and that, in one manifestation or another, creates financial fragility in many other settings.5 However, one thing that is distinctive about the variant presented in the current paper is that there is a clear prediction of exactly what sets off the run for the exits on the part of money managers--namely, a small increase in short rates beyond a certain threshold level.6 
One that the paper briefly mentions, and that is worth a fuller treatment, has to do with the potential for outflows of assets under management (AUM) from open-end funds.
But another source of run-like risk comes from the strategic interaction among fund investors and the incentives that each of them may have to get out before others do when asset values are at risk of declining.
The key question in determining whether there is a strategic complementarity in the withdrawal decisions of fund investors is, When investor i exits on day t, does the net asset value (NAV) at the end of the day that defines investor i's exit price fully reflect the ultimate price effect of the sales created by his exit? If not, those investors who stay behind are hurt, which is what creates run incentives.
And, second, if most of a fund's assets are illiquid securities, its manager will be inclined to accommodate early exits by drawing down on the fund's cash reserve while planning to sell securities and replenish the cash stock later.
Why, at the end of the day, should one care if run-like incentives come predominantly from the strategic behavior of fund investors, as opposed to that of fund managers? Isn't there the same worrisome fragility in either case? Perhaps, but the policy response may differ depending on the exact diagnosis.
In the former case, when the primary worry is AUM runs on the part of investors, there is at least in principle a natural regulatory fix:One could impose exit fees on open-end funds that are related to the illiquidity of the funds' assets, in an effort to make departing investors more fully internalize the costs that they impose on those who stay behind.
In the latter case, when the problem is driven more by the portfolio choices of fund managers, it is harder for me to see an obvious regulatory response, so I am more inclined to share the authors' view that if there is, indeed, a significant financial stability problem, monetary policy would be left to take up some of the slack.
For example, the model suggests that, during the unfolding of an episode of bond market volatility like the one in the spring and summer of last year, we should see a coordinated shift among bond managers out of long-term bonds and into bills so that the average durations of their portfolios would co-move strongly together.
There is a well-developed empirical literature on herding among fund managers in their portfolio allocations, but, as far as I know, this work has not looked at how such herding responds to changes in the monetary policy environment.8 So this avenue seems like a potentially promising one to pursue.
In this regard, a particularly interesting set of findings has to do with the ability of flows to forecast future asset returns, even controlling for past returns.
And, most notably, this forecasting effect is much stronger in the less liquid high-yield and emerging market categories than it is in U.S.
First, I think they are absolutely on target in emphasizing that the rapid growth of fixed-income funds--as well as other, similar vehicles--bears careful watching.
As they point out, it would be a mistake to be complacent about this phenomenon simply because such funds are unlevered.
Other economic mechanisms can mimic the run-like incentives associated with short-term debt financing, and one or more of these mechanisms may well be present in fixed-income funds.
Second, I also agree that there is no general separation principle for monetary policy and financial stability.
Monetary policy is fundamentally in the business of altering risk premiums such as term premiums and credit spreads.
So monetary policymakers cannot wash their hands of what happens when these spreads revert sharply.
If these abrupt reversions also turn out to have nontrivial economic consequences, then they are clearly of potential relevance to policymakers.
My one qualification is as follows: In the absence of a general separation principle, when one might consider addressing financial stability issues either with regulation or with monetary policy, it becomes all the more critical to get the case-by-case analysis right--that is, to really dig into the microeconomic details of the presumed market failure and to ask when a regulatory intervention is comparatively more efficient than a monetary one, or vice versa.
So while I think it is important to remain heterodox and to be open to taking either approach, I would not want to rule out the possibility that some of the risks identified by the authors could be mitigated, at least in part, via a regulatory approach.
"Market Tantrums and Monetary Policy," paper presented at the 2014 U.S.
"Monetary Policy Surprises, Credit Costs and Economic Activity (PDF)," working paper, October.
"Monetary Policy and Real Borrowing Costs at the Zero Lower Bound," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2014-03.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, December.
"Monetary Policy and Long-Term Real Rates," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2012-46.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, July.
 The views expressed here are my own and are not necessarily shared by other members of the Federal Reserve Board and the Federal Open Market Committee.

Tonight, I'm going to share with you some thoughts about the powerful impact the housing and mortgage markets have on the nation's economic recovery, present some ideas to effect positive change in the mortgage servicing industry, and finally impart a guiding principle that should help us find our way through the current struggles and drive the way our industry operates in the future.
Speaking strictly in an economic sense, the recession that emerged in 2008 is over.
Our economy is growing, but the pace of recovery is agonizingly slow, well behind the pace of recovery in prior recessions.
There are several causes for this lethargy, but, in my view, the critically important drag on the economy is the absence of any substantial recovery in the housing sector.
Traditionally, housing is the first sector to recover after a recession, buoyed by low interest rates and pent-up demand.
In addition, the persistent high rate of unemployment is further depressing housing demand, creating uncertainty about housing prices, and impeding that robust recovery in the housing sector that we generally see.
Potential buyers seem inclined to wait and see if they can get a better buy in the future.
When banks have troubled mortgages on their books, they may be required to increase their loss provisioning and implement troubled debt restructuring, which in turn reduces the amount of funds they have to lend.
When people lose their homes, the impact is felt not only by the homeowners, but by the broader community: the bonds of community are weakened, business investment is undermined, homelessness increases, children are uprooted, unemployment deepens, and even health problems multiply.
To see the kind of economic recovery we want, we need to revive our housing sector and restore the communities that were shaken by its collapse.
So what needs to happen now? To begin with, we should start at the ground level and work with troubled borrowers to prevent additional foreclosures that will further weaken the market.
And, for homeowners whose financial distress is the result of job loss, something as simple as payment forbearance while the homeowner is unemployed could prevent the loan from going to foreclosure.
These actions will have a far-reaching positive impact: A lower inventory of distressed properties for sale results in higher house prices, which leads to a healthier pace of recovery in the housing market and the broader economy.
I can't emphasize enough how important it is that servicers be willing and diligent in offering assistance to troubled homeowners: It is key to the pace of economic recovery.
For those in the housing and mortgage fields, making needed changes will not be easy.
In particular, for those in the mortgage servicing industry, it means difficult changes and significant investments to rectify broken systems.
How do I know this? Late last year, the federal banking agencies began a targeted review of loan servicing practices at large financial institutions that had significant market concentrations in mortgage servicing.
The agencies intend to report more specific findings to the public soon, but I can tell you that these deficiencies pose significant risk to mortgage servicing and foreclosure processes, impair the functioning of mortgage markets, and diminish overall accountability to homeowners.
I'm sure this has been said, but I'll say it again because I have seen little to no evidence of improvement in the operational performance of servicers since the onset of the crisis in 2007: Until these operational problems are addressed once and for all, the foreclosure crisis will continue and the housing sector will languish.
Going forward, the servicing industry must foster an operational environment that reflects safe and sound banking principles and compliance with applicable state and federal law.
In my mind, massive foreclosures were always a sign of an equally massive market failure.
One step the industry could take that would have an enormous payoff for consumers and market participants would be to change its pricing model.
The economic incentives and pressure points of the current servicing model cause problems at multiple levels.
This annual servicing fee is an important income source that has to cover some wildly varying costs.
The current model is structured with the hope that, over a given period of time, there are enough of the low-touch performing loans to cross-subsidize the high-touch non-performing ones, so that the overall pool of servicing fee revenue is sufficient to cover expenses and return a reasonable profit.
Such a system could more appropriately compensate servicers and sub-servicers for the level of work involved in servicing very different types of loans.
Another structural change that would help would be a limit on the extent to which servicers have to advance principal and interest on non-performing loans.
This could be addressed by changing secondary market standards so that servicers only have to advance mortgage principal and interest up to, say, 60 or 90 days beyond delinquency.
Alternatively, they could advance principal and interest payments only as they come in--a so-called "actual/actual" schedule.
Either change would affect the payment streams to investors, but I would imagine that participants in the secondary markets would be able to model with some confidence how this would affect the value of securities and adjust pricing accordingly.
This has proven true, I might add, on the underwriting and secondary market sides of the house, and we are now seeing courts reject some of those practices.
These are some initial thoughts on how to rebuild an important but currently dysfunctional sector of the housing market.
Surely details need to be worked out, costs accounted for, and potential unintended consequences thought through.
This isn't easy, and time is of the essence because the drag on our recovery is palpable.
We need the incentives that permit us to reengineer this sector of the market and build a business model that actually works.
And servicers need to understand that the homeowner is an important constituent, if for no other reason than that it is the homeowner who is critical to the revitalization of the housing sector.
In the process of rebuilding, we all have a significant and urgent role to play.
The Federal Reserve Board has acted to provide unprecedented levels of liquidity to the market since the crisis began through the development of an accommodative monetary policy and the establishment and implementation of back-stop facilities and last-resort lending.
We clearly need to continue thinking about obstacles that exist in the realm of strong mortgage lending.
There is always more that the Federal Reserve can consider in terms of reforms that are needed for housing finance, mortgage lending, and mortgage service providers.
But the government can only do so much, and relevant private sector actors need to think beyond their bottom line and focus on how their firms' actions are or are not contributing to the economic recovery.
I am convinced that, in order for our economic reconstruction to come about, it will be essential for each of us to commit to furthering the good of our nation, our neighborhoods, and our fellow citizens.
I do not want to revisit all of the sordid events that brought us to economic crisis in 2008 but, suffice it to say that, in the housing sector, we traveled a very low road that had nothing to do with looking out for the greater good.
This selfish free-for-all ultimately led to an economic slide the effects of which are still visible in the boarded-up houses and sheriffs' foreclosure notices posted all over America.
We pulled back from the brink of depression only through a massive and unprecedented infusion of public dollars in the banking system, and in other systemically important firms, to prevent collapse.
In other words, the public was forced into a position where it had to put a lot on the line to save the financial system from its own follies and from total ruin.
Now, it is time to pay back the American citizenry in full, and not just in the literal sense, but in the sense that there must be reciprocity and mutuality in our structuring of economic policy so that we do not travel this low road again.
Bluntly stated, the government reluctantly provided the taxpayer funds necessary to unfreeze the financial markets and get our financial institutions on their feet again, with the expectation that the benefits would be directly meaningful to those taxpayers in their households and communities.
The financial institutions that have been bolstered directly and indirectly by government subsidy and aid must now seek to support those who have been buffeted and injured by the housing crisis.
It means that financial institutions need to understand the effects their actions will have on consumers and the country as a whole, and factor those considerations in to their business decisions.
This is the high road--a moral and economic imperative that must be the driving purpose that unifies and animates our efforts.
Indeed, the high road demands that we become effective institutional innovators for positive changes in our communities and for housing practices that promote community well-being.
Yes, our economy has started to rebound, but we need a strong housing market in order to ensure a complete, stable, and sustainable recovery.
The meltdown in the housing sector set off our economic crisis, and the reconstruction of the housing sector will help bring it to a close.
Each of you has a role to play in this mission, and I urge you to embrace this challenge and to do your part to contribute to the economic rebuilding of our country.

I am pleased to be here at the National Press Club, and I'm especially glad for the opportunity to have a conversation with journalists who write about economic policy from our nation's capital.
Virtually every American is affected by developments in the economy and in economic policy.
But contemporary economic issues can be highly complex, and few nonspecialists have the time or the background to master these issues on their own.
Today, I will provide a brief update on the economy and how I expect it to evolve in the near term.
Then I will turn to the implications for monetary policy.
The economic recovery that began in the middle of 2009 appears to have strengthened in recent months, although, to date, growth has not been fast enough to bring about a significant improvement in the job market.
The early phase of the recovery, in the second half of 2009 and in early 2010, was largely attributable to the stabilization of the financial system, the effects of expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, and a strong boost to production from businesses rebuilding their depleted inventories.
But economic growth slowed significantly last spring as the impetus from inventory building and fiscal stimulus diminished and as Europe's debt problems roiled global financial markets.
Notably, we learned last week that households increased their spending in the fourth quarter, in real terms, at an annual rate of more than 4 percent.
Businesses' investments in new equipment and software grew robustly over most of last year, as firms replaced aging equipment and as the demand for their products and services expanded.
Overall, however, improving household and business confidence, accommodative monetary policy, and more-supportive financial conditions, including an apparent increase in the willingness of banks to make loans, seems likely to lead to a more rapid pace of economic recovery in 2011 than we saw last year.
While indicators of spending and production have, on balance, been encouraging, the job market has improved only slowly.
Following the loss of about 8‑1/2 million jobs in 2008 and 2009, private-sector employment showed gains in 2010.
However, these gains were barely sufficient to accommodate the inflow of recent graduates and other new entrants to the labor force and, therefore, not enough to significantly reduce the overall unemployment rate.
Recent data do provide some grounds for optimism on the employment front; for example, initial claims for unemployment insurance have generally been trending down, and indicators of job openings and firms' hiring plans have improved.
Even so, with output growth likely to be moderate for awhile and with employers reportedly still reluctant to add to their payrolls, it will be several years before the unemployment rate has returned to a more normal level.
On the inflation front, we have recently seen significant increases in some highly visible prices, notably for gasoline.
Indeed, prices of many commodities have risen lately, largely as a result of the very strong demand from fast-growing emerging market economies, coupled, in some cases, with constraints on supply.
Nevertheless, overall inflation remains quite low: Over the 12 months ending in December, prices for all the goods and services purchased by households increased by only 1.2 percent, down from 2.4 percent over the prior 12 months.1 To assess underlying trends in inflation, economists also follow several alternative measures of inflation; one such measure is so-called core inflation, which excludes the more volatile food and energy components and therefore can be a better predictor of where overall inflation is headed.
Core inflation was only 0.7 percent in 2010, compared with around 2-1/2 percent in 2007, the year before the recession began.
Wage growth has slowed as well, with average hourly earnings increasing only 1.8 percent last year.
These downward trends in wage and price inflation are not surprising, given the substantial slack in the economy.
In sum, although economic growth will probably increase this year, we expect the unemployment rate to remain stubbornly above, and inflation to remain persistently below, the levels that Federal Reserve policymakers have judged to be consistent over the longer term with our mandate from the Congress to foster maximum employment and price stability.
Under such conditions, the Federal Reserve would typically ease monetary policy by reducing the target for its short-term policy interest rate, the federal funds rate.
However, the target range for the funds rate has been near zero since December 2008, and the Federal Reserve has indicated that economic conditions are likely to warrant an exceptionally low target rate for an extended period.
As a result, for the past two years we have been using alternative tools to provide additional monetary accommodation.

In particular, over the past two years the Federal Reserve has further eased monetary conditions by purchasing longer-term securities on the open market.
In August 2010, we began reinvesting the proceeds from all securities that matured or were redeemed in longer-term Treasury securities, so as to keep the size of our securities holdings roughly constant.
Around the same time, we began to signal to financial markets that we were considering providing additional monetary policy accommodation by conducting further asset purchases.
And in early November, we announced a plan to purchase an additional $600 billion in longer-term Treasury securities by the middle of this year.
All these purchases are settled through the banking system, with the result that depository institutions now hold a very high level of reserve balances with the Federal Reserve.
Although large-scale purchases of longer-term securities are a different monetary policy tool than the more familiar approach of targeting the federal funds rate, the two types of policies affect the economy in similar ways.
Conventional monetary policy easing works by lowering market expectations for the future path of short-term interest rates, which, in turn, reduces the current level of longer-term interest rates and contributes to an easing in broader financial conditions.
These changes, by reducing borrowing costs and raising asset prices, bolster household and business spending and thus increase economic activity.
By comparison, the Federal Reserve's purchases of longer-term securities have not affected very short-term interest rates, which remain close to zero, but instead put downward pressure directly on longer-term interest rates.
By easing conditions in credit and financial markets, these actions encourage spending by households and businesses through essentially the same channels as conventional monetary policy, thereby supporting the economic recovery.
A wide range of market indicators supports the view that the Federal Reserve's securities purchases have been effective at easing financial conditions.
For example, since August, when we announced our policy of reinvesting maturing securities and signaled we were considering more purchases, equity prices have risen significantly, volatility in the equity market has fallen, corporate bond spreads have narrowed, and inflation compensation as measured in the market for inflation-indexed securities has risen from low to more normal levels.
Yields on 5- to 10-year Treasury securities initially declined markedly as markets priced in prospective Fed purchases; these yields subsequently rose, however, as investors became more optimistic about economic growth and as traders scaled back their expectations of future securities purchases.
All of these developments are what one would expect to see when monetary policy becomes more accommodative, whether through conventional or less conventional means.
Interestingly, these developments are also remarkably similar to those that occurred during the earlier episode of policy easing, notably in the months following our March 2009 announcement of a significant expansion in securities purchases.
The fact that financial markets responded in very similar ways to each of these policy actions lends credence to the view that these actions had the expected effects on markets and are thereby providing significant support to job creation and the economy.
My colleagues and I have said that we will review the asset purchase program regularly in light of incoming information and will adjust it as needed to promote maximum employment and stable prices.
In particular, it bears emphasizing that we have the necessary tools to smoothly and effectively exit from the asset purchase program at the appropriate time.
In particular, our ability to pay interest on reserve balances held at the Federal Reserve Banks will allow us to put upward pressure on short-term market interest rates and thus to tighten monetary policy when required, even if bank reserves remain high.
Moreover, we have developed additional tools that will allow us to drain or immobilize bank reserves as required to facilitate the smooth withdrawal of policy accommodation when conditions warrant.
If needed, we could also tighten policy by redeeming or selling securities.
The federal budget deficit has expanded to an average of more than 9 percent of gross domestic product (GDP) over the past two years, up from an average of about 2 percent of GDP during the three years prior to the recession.
The extraordinarily wide deficit largely reflects the weakness of the economy along with the actions that the Administration and the Congress took to ease the recession and steady financial markets.
However, even after economic and financial conditions have returned to normal, the federal budget will remain on an unsustainable path, with the budget gap becoming increasingly large over time, unless the Congress enacts significant changes in fiscal programs.
For example, under plausible assumptions about how fiscal policies might evolve in the absence of major legislative changes, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projects the deficit to fall from around 9 percent of GDP currently to roughly 5 percent of GDP by 2015, but then to rise to about 6‑1/2 percent of GDP by the end of the decade.2 After that, it projects the budget outlook to deteriorate even more rapidly, with federal debt held by the public reaching almost 90 percent of GDP by 2020 and 150 percent of GDP by 2030, up from about 60 percent at the end of fiscal year 2010.

The long-term fiscal challenges confronting the nation are especially daunting because they are mostly the product of powerful underlying trends, not short-term or temporary factors.
The two most important driving forces for the federal budget are the aging of the U.S.
Indeed, the CBO projects that federal spending for health-care programs--which includes Medicare, Medicaid, and subsidies to purchase health insurance through new insurance exchanges--will roughly double as a percentage of GDP over the next 25 years.3 The ability to control health-care costs, while still providing high-quality care to those who need it, will be critical for bringing the federal budget onto a sustainable path.
The retirement of the baby-boom generation will also strain Social Security, as the number of workers paying taxes into the system rises more slowly than the number of people receiving benefits.
By 2030, when most of the baby boomers will have retired, this ratio is projected to decline to around 3.4 Overall, the projected fiscal pressures associated with Social Security are considerably smaller than the pressures associated with federal health programs, but they are still notable.
The CBO's long-term budget projections, by design, do not account for the likely adverse economic effects of such high debt and deficits.
But if government debt and deficits were actually to grow at the pace envisioned, the economic and financial effects would be severe.
Sustained high rates of government borrowing would both drain funds away from private investment and increase our debt to foreigners, with adverse long-run effects on U.S.
Moreover, diminishing investor confidence that deficits will be brought under control would ultimately lead to sharply rising interest rates on government debt and, potentially, to broader financial turmoil.
In a vicious circle, high and rising interest rates would cause debt-service payments on the federal debt to grow even faster, causing further increases in the debt-to-GDP ratio and making fiscal adjustment all the more difficult.

How much adjustment is needed to restore fiscal sustainability in the United States? To help answer this question, it is useful to apply the concept of the primary budget deficit, which is the government budget deficit excluding interest payments on the national debt.
To stabilize the ratio of federal debt to the GDP--a convenient benchmark for assessing fiscal sustainability--the primary budget deficit must be reduced to zero.5 Under the CBO projection that I noted earlier, the primary budget deficit is expected to be 2 percent of GDP in 2015 and then rise to almost 3 percent of GDP in 2020 and 6 percent of GDP in 2030.
To put the budget on a sustainable trajectory, policy actions--either reductions in spending or increases in revenues or some combination of the two--will have to be taken to eventually close these primary budget gaps.
By definition, the unsustainable trajectories of deficits and debt that the CBO outlines cannot actually happen, because creditors would never be willing to lend to a government with debt, relative to national income, that is rising without limit.
The economist Herbert Stein succinctly described this type of situation: "If something cannot go on forever, it will stop."6 One way or the other, fiscal adjustments sufficient to stabilize the federal budget must occur at some point.
The question is whether these adjustments will take place through a careful and deliberative process that weighs priorities and gives people adequate time to adjust to changes in government programs or tax policies, or whether the needed fiscal adjustments will be a rapid and painful response to a looming or actual fiscal crisis.
Acting now to develop a credible program to reduce future deficits would not only enhance economic growth and stability in the long run, but could also yield substantial near-term benefits in terms of lower long-term interest rates and increased consumer and business confidence.
Of course, economic growth is affected not only by the levels of taxes and spending, but also by their composition and structure.
I hope that, in addressing our long-term fiscal challenges, the Congress and the Administration will seek reforms to the government's tax policies and spending priorities that serve not only to reduce the deficit, but also to enhance the long-term growth potential of our economy--for example, by reducing disincentives to work and to save, by encouraging investment in the skills of our workforce as well as in new machinery and equipment, by promoting research and development, and by providing necessary public infrastructure.
Our nation cannot reasonably expect to grow its way out of our fiscal imbalances, but a more productive economy will ease the tradeoffs that we face.
Inflation data are derived using the price index for personal consumption expenditures.
The so-called alternative fiscal policy scenario, which assumes, among other things, that most of the tax cuts enacted in 2001 and 2003 are made permanent and that discretionary federal outlays rise at the same rate as GDP, is presented in Congressional Budget Office (2010), The Long-Term Budget Outlook (Washington: CBO, June (revised August)).
See the two long-term scenarios for mandatory federal spending on health care shown in figure 2-3, p.
This result requires that the nominal rate of interest paid on government debt equal the rate of growth of nominal GDP, a condition which usually serves as a reasonable approximation.
If the rate of interest on government debt is higher than the growth rate of nominal GDP, as might happen if creditors become wary of lending, then a primary budget surplus rather than primary balance is needed to stabilize the ratio of debt to GDP.

However, my area of study was not what most would consider a logical first step for someone who would one day become a central banker.
Tonight I have been asked to share with you some of the memorable experiences I have had since I was last in a Chapel Hill classroom--some of the amazing opportunities that shaped my journey from Carolina Playmaker to Federal Reserve Governor.

I'll talk a bit about banking and the important role lending plays in the economy.
I'll describe how my banking career led me to a seat on the Federal Reserve Board and how that unique perspective helped me add value after I arrived there.
I will then explain some of the actions taken by the central bank at a time of extraordinary financial uncertainty, and I'll describe some of the attributes that make the Federal Reserve an institution like no other.
Regardless of economic conditions, the acting profession has an unemployment rate of about 95 percent--or so it seemed to me at the time.

The president of the bank was an old-fashioned community banker and a natural teacher.

Because the bank was just starting up, there were only 11 employees.
With lots of work to be done and not many people to do it, I was able to try my hand at nearly every job at the bank and to see the results of every action that was taken.
One of those early jobs was reconciling the bank's account at the Federal Reserve and calculating the bank's reserve position.

Today, I spend a lot of my time thinking about the collective reserves held by all banks and how those reserves impact our economy.
My early experiences with making reserve decisions for a tiny community bank makes it much easier to connect the dots between Federal Reserve actions to add or withdraw reserves, bankers' decisions to manage their reserve accounts, and the resulting impact on interest rates, which in turn influence economic activity.
The banking industry has a tradition of teaching basic concepts of bank management through in-house or industry-sponsored banking schools.
Once I realized that my talent for banking was much stronger than my natural acting ability, I started going to banking schools to learn about bank investments, lending, and bank management.
I soon began teaching bank management in the same schools I had attended earlier.

One of the best teaching tools I discovered was bank simulation.
As issues have developed throughout the financial crisis and the recovery, I have had more than a few occasions to be grateful for the deep understanding of how banks and bankers react to various external conditions that I gained from all those simulations.
And I have discovered that the Federal Reserve uses its own models of the economy to simulate outcomes and create economic forecasts under a variety of assumptions.
Much of my time as a community banker was spent lending to small businesses.
In many banks today, small business lending is an automated process that relies on computers to analyze data and determine a borrower's creditworthiness.
But understanding the borrower's ability to successfully run a business was just as important as analyzing the numbers.

At times, especially during the economic downturn of the early 1990s, I had to deal with problem loans.
Now, as a bank regulator in the middle of a financial crisis, this deep personal understanding of the lending and loan collection process strongly influences my policy views.
I fully expected to complete my career working as a community banker in my hometown.
But in early 2007, I received a call asking if I would be interested in serving as a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
I had interacted with the Fed throughout my banking career and had even served on the Board of Directors of the Richmond Federal Reserve Bank.
The Federal Reserve is the central bank of the United States.
The Congress created the Federal Reserve in 1913, after a series of banking panics, "to furnish an elastic currency, to afford a means of rediscounting commercial paper, to establish a more effective supervision of banking in the United States and for other purposes."1 When I joined the Board of Governors in August 2008, the Fed's ability to respond to financial crises was about to be tested as never before.
For as long as they have existed, central banks have calmed financial crises by lending to financial institutions against good collateral.
Because central banks step in when other sources of funds retreat, central banks acting in this capacity are known as lenders of last resort.
But that phrase doesn't mean that central banks make bad loans; nearly all of their loans are to sound borrowers with sound collateral.
Banks rely on short-term funding such as overnight interbank loans or customer deposits to make the longer-term loans their customers need.
If funding becomes scarce, banks become less willing to extend credit.
To maintain the flow of credit to businesses and consumers, the Federal Reserve provides short-term credit to sound depository institutions as needed.
To ensure that banks use the facility only as a backup source of funds, Federal Reserve loans are made at an above-market rate.
In the Panic of 2008, liquidity needs were not confined to the banking system.
The shadow banking system, made up of investment banks, money market funds, finance companies, and investors in a wide range of debt securities, provided a large part of the credit that fueled our economy.
When panic set in, it froze lending in banks and non-banks alike and produced funding pressures across a wide range of markets and institutions.
The actions taken by the Federal Reserve to fight the crisis were quite traditional in the sense that, for years, central banks have been providing liquidity by lending to financial intermediaries.
But they were unconventional in that the concepts had to be adapted to fit markets and lenders that had never been supported by the Federal Reserve before.
Funding was drying up for one institution after another and for one market after another.
Our efforts to provide liquidity were criticized by some as bailouts for the banks.
I can understand how it could seem that way, but I also know that every action the Fed took was directed at improving the economy rather than the well-being of the banks.
First and foremost was the calm, decisive leadership by Chairman Bernanke, whose lifelong study of economics and economic history provided unique preparation for his own role in history.
Almost as important were the hundreds of Fed economists, lawyers, bank supervisors, and market specialists who worked around the clock to craft creative solutions to every financial market challenge.
I do know that they responded to every question and strived to mitigate every risk that was identified.
And while the strain was evident in their tired eyes, the collegiality and intellectual rigor that I have come to know as a hallmark of the Federal Reserve never wavered.
Finally, for me, was the knowledge of all those small businesses that depended on credit to run their businesses.
In addition, through other programs, we supported securities made up of loans to households and businesses, including loans for business equipment, for inventory, for insurance payments, for business credit cards, and for loans guaranteed by the small business administration.
To be sure, lenders reacted to uncertain economic conditions and weaker borrowers by tightening credit standards.
But, with liquidity provided by the Federal Reserve, loans to borrowers who met the tighter standards continued to flow.
economy continues to face challenges, but I am convinced that the forceful actions of the Federal Reserve in 2008 helped prevent what might have been a far worse scenario.
The Federal Reserve was originally created to guard against financial panics.
But in modern times, many people think of its primary role as responsibility for monetary policy.
The Congress has given the Federal Reserve two objectives, known as our dual mandate, to foster maximum employment and price stability.
In its conduct of monetary policy, the Fed influences the level of output and the level of prices in the economy through changes to interest rates and credit conditions.
During more normal times, the Federal Reserve's policymaking is focused on short-term interest rates, our main tool for steering the economy.
The Fed influences the costs of borrowing to buy everything from cars to condos to computers by controlling short-term interest rates.
Interest rates can be lowered to stimulate borrowing and spending when demand is otherwise weak, or raised to dampen demand and curb inflation.
Before I arrived in August 2008, the Federal Reserve had already responded to the weakening in the economy by aggressively lowering its federal funds rate target from 5-1/4 percent in September 2007 to 2 percent.
From a historical perspective, 2 percent is an extremely low level for interest rates.
But as the financial crisis intensified and the economic outlook grew more dire in the fall of 2008, the Fed continued to cut rates.
For more than two years now, our policies have held short-term interest rates close to zero.
Just as the Federal Reserve used traditional concepts in unconventional ways to provide liquidity to the shadow banking system and stop the panic, once our main short‑term interest rate lever was effectively at zero, we moved beyond traditional monetary policy to purchase longer-term assets and push down longer-term interest rates.
In November 2008, the Fed began purchasing large volumes of longer-term, U.S.
Those purchases put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates generally and helped normalize the spread between mortgage rates and long-term Treasury rates, which had widened during the financial crisis.
Reducing longer-term rates influences the economy in much the same way as lowering the expected path of short-term rates.
For instance, the decline in longer-term rates lowers the cost and increases the availability of capital and credit, which in turn encourages business expansion.
In the most recent episode, another important result of lower rates has been a reduction in debt service burdens from existing debt.
In November 2010, recognizing that progress toward the achievement of our dual mandate was disappointingly slow, the Fed decided to put additional downward pressure on longer-term interest rates by purchasing longer-term Treasury securities with a stated objective to purchase $600 billion by the end of June 2011.
So far, I have talked about what the Federal Reserve has done during the time I have been there.
The Federal Reserve is an independent entity within the federal government in that its decisions do not have to be ratified by the President or any other executive branch official.
The Congress, through the Federal Reserve Act, sets the Federal Reserve's goals and oversees it, but the Federal Reserve decides independently how to achieve its congressionally mandated goals.
The ability to make monetary policy decisions that are free of short-term political influence is critical for central banks.
This is especially true because the effective conduct of monetary policy requires a long-term perspective.
A central bank that is subject to political pressure might opt for policies that favor rapid expansion in the near term at the expense of higher inflation in the future.
Such actions would surely result in the loss of the confidence and credibility that are needed to achieve the objectives of monetary policy.
Indeed, research has shown that countries with independent central banks have better economic performance and lower inflation than countries whose central banks are not independent.2 
The structure of the Federal Reserve is uniquely American in its decentralization.
The Federal Reserve System is made up of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., and 12 Federal Reserve Banks across the country.
The seven members of the Board of Governors are nominated by the President and confirmed by the Senate.
Each Reserve Bank has a board of directors drawn from business, public, labor, nonprofit, and banking leadership within its district.
In consultation with the Board of Governors, the Reserve Bank directors choose a president to run the bank.3 The Board of Governors oversees the Reserve Banks and is responsible for formulating bank regulations; supervising banks; and for making decisions regarding lending, other than discount window lending, to depository institutions.4 
The Reserve Banks provide financial services to depository institutions, the U.S.
gov­ernment, and foreign official institutions, including making discount window loans and playing a major role in operating the nation's payments system.
Under delegated authority from the Board, the Reserve Banks also conduct on-site supervision of bank holding companies and state-chartered banks that choose to join the Federal Reserve System.
Monetary policy decisions are made by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).
While all 12 Reserve Bank Presidents and all members of the Board of Governors participate in FOMC discussions, the voting members of the FOMC are made up of the members of the Board of Governors, the President of the New York Reserve Bank, and four of the remaining Presidents on a rotating basis.5 
The culture of the Federal Reserve is an interesting blend of government, academia, and business.
The System is a treasure trove of data, research, and institutional memory about the economy and the financial system.
In searching for that first job or even some of the ones that come later, don't be afraid to take one at an entry level, as I did when I started as a teller, or one that seems quite daunting, regardless of your qualifications, as I faced when I joined the Federal Reserve.
Finally, if, as I suggest, you are going to take advantage of all the opportunities that come your way, I would like to stress the importance of lifelong learning to develop the skills that will be needed to tackle new challenges.
Remember that, sometimes, asking the right questions is just as important as knowing the right answers.
I think Woodrow Wilson--the President who inspired the Federal Reserve Act--said it well, albeit long-windedly: "You are not here merely to make a living.
And I have been fortunate to work alongside other public servants who share the commitment to bettering the lives of the people we serve by working to ensure a strong financial system and a stable economy.
3 (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, September), pp.13-52; Vittorio Grilli, Donato Masciandaro, and Guido Tabellini (1991), "Political and Monetary Institutions and Public Finance Policies in the Industrial Countries," Economic Policy, vol.
342-92; Alex Cukierman (1992), Central Bank Strategies, Credibility, and Independence: Theory and Evidence (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press); Alex Cukierman, Steven B.
Webb, and Bilin Neyapti (1992), "Measuring the Independence of Central Banks and Its Effect on Policy Outcomes," World Bank Economic Review, vol.
Summers (1993), "Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
Webb (1993), "Central Bank Independence, Growth, Investment, and Real Rates," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.
Miller, and Bilin Neyapti (2002), "Central Bank Reform, Liberalization and Inflation in Transition Economies--An International Perspective," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
Each Federal Reserve Bank's Class B and Class C directors appoint a president.
See section 4(4), subparagraph "Fifth," of the Federal Reserve Act, as amended by section 1107 of Pub.
For a fuller discussion of the responsibilities of the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve Banks, see The Federal Reserve System: Purposes & Functions.

At the The Brimmer Policy Forum, Allied Social Science Associations Annual Meeting, Denver, Colorado
I am delighted to participate in this Brimmer Policy Forum, not least because this year marks the 45th anniversary of Andrew's appointment by President Johnson as a Governor of the Federal Reserve Board.
Andrew's ongoing work in organizing this annual forum reflects his long-standing commitment to fostering economic analysis and public discourse on key policy issues.
In my remarks today, I will discuss the rationale for the decision by the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) in November to initiate a new program of asset purchases, and I will address some frequently asked questions (FAQs) regarding the program's economic and financial effects both here and abroad.1 The purpose of the new asset purchase program, like all of the monetary policy actions taken by the FOMC since the onset of the global financial crisis, is to fulfill our congressionally mandated objectives of promoting maximum employment and price stability.
In pursuit of these goals, the FOMC brought the target federal funds rate down close to zero by late 2008; conducted large-scale purchases of longer-term securities during 2009 and early 2010; and, last summer, modified its reinvestment policy to keep the Federal Reserve's balance sheet from shrinking as mortgage-related securities matured or were redeemed.
In early November, the Committee announced that it intends to purchase an additional $600 billion in longer-term Treasury securities by the middle of this year.
To understand the rationale for our asset purchase program, it is helpful to review the evolution of macroeconomic conditions over the past several years.
The National Bureau of Economic Research has dated the recession as having begun in December 2007, but the pace of economic contraction accelerated in the wake of the Lehman Brothers collapse in September 2008 and the ensuing disruption to global financial markets.
As shown in figure 1, the unemployment rate rose from around 5 percent in the spring of 2008 to about 10 percent by the autumn of 2009 and has stayed well above 9 percent since then.
Most observers, including myself, judge this level of unemployment to be much higher than levels consistent with full employment and stable inflation.
For example, in a recent Survey of Professional Forecasters conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, the median estimate of the current level of structural unemployment--often referred to as the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU)--stood at about 5-3/4 percent, implying that the unemployment gap is nearly 4 percentage points.
For example, roughly 4 percentage points of today's unemployment rate reflects individuals who have been unemployed for half a year or more.
Those who experience an extended period of unemployment face a risk of losing their ability to participate successfully in the workforce, lending additional urgency to the task of reviving the demand for labor.
And, indeed, as shown in figure 2, measures of inflation for personal consumption expenditures (PCE) have declined significantly since 2008.
For the total PCE inflation rate, the underlying trend is obscured to some extent by large swings in energy prices.
As inflation has trended downward, measures of underlying inflation have fallen somewhat below the levels of about 2 percent or a bit less that most Committee participants judge to be consistent, over the longer run, with the FOMC's dual mandate.
In particular, a modest positive rate of inflation over time allows for a slightly higher average level of nominal interest rates, thereby creating more scope for the FOMC to respond to adverse shocks.
A modest positive inflation rate also reduces the risk that such shocks could result in deflation, which can be associated with poor macroeconomic performance.
Of course, if incoming information last autumn had been pointing to greater momentum in the prospects for economic growth or to a rapid escalation in inflation, then the case for further monetary policy easing might have seemed less pressing.
The Federal Reserve publishes a Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) four times a year in conjunction with the FOMC minutes.
As shown in the November SEP, most Committee participants anticipated that the economy would recover only gradually and projected that the unemployment rate would still be at around 8 percent at the end of 2012--an outlook that is shared by most outside forecasters.
Similarly, Committee participants generally expected inflation to rise very gradually toward levels consistent with the Federal Reserve's mandate.
Moreover, continuing downside risks to the outlook for economic activity and inflation strengthened the case for providing additional monetary policy accommodation, thereby reducing the risk of another downturn in economic activity or a further decline in inflation.
In weighing its policy options last autumn, the Committee gave careful consideration to the question of whether further purchases of longer-term Treasury securities were likely to be effective in fostering economic recovery and bringing inflation back up to levels judged to be consistent with the dual mandate.3 In my judgment, both theoretical analysis and empirical evidence suggested that such purchases could provide effective stimulus by keeping longer-term interest rates lower than they would otherwise be.
The underlying theory, in which asset prices are directly linked to the outstanding quantity of assets, dates back to the early 1950s.4 For example, in preferred-habitat models, short- and long-term assets are imperfect substitutes in investors' portfolios, and the effect of arbitrageurs is limited by their risk aversion or by market frictions such as capital constraints.
Consequently, the term structure of interest rates can be influenced by exogenous shocks in supply and demand at specific maturities.
Purchases of longer-term securities by the central bank can be viewed as a shift in supply that tends to push up the prices and drive down the yields on those securities.
In the context of such an analytical framework, the effect of an asset purchase program also depends on investors' perceptions of the future path of short-term interest rates as well as their perceptions of the timing and pace of the central bank's eventual unwinding of its asset purchases.
Thus, central bank communication may play a key role in influencing the financial market response to such a program.
Recent empirical work provides a rough gauge of the quantitative effects of longer-term securities purchases.5 For example, event studies have investigated the short-term response of asset prices to announcements by the Federal Reserve and the Bank of England regarding their respective asset purchase programs.
Table 1 summarizes the response of selected financial variables on four dates associated with the Federal Reserve's first round of asset purchases.
On November 25, 2008, the Federal Reserve announced that it would purchase up to $600 billion in agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) and agency debt.
As is evident from the table, these announcements were generally associated with a substantial decline in the 10-year Treasury yield and the yield on 10-year Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS) as well as in rates on agency MBS and corporate debt.
Turning now to the macroeconomic effects of the Federal Reserve's securities purchases, there are several distinct channels through which these purchases tend to influence aggregate demand, including a reduced cost of credit to consumers and businesses, a rise in asset prices that boosts household wealth and spending, and a moderate change in the foreign exchange value of the dollar that provides support to net exports.
The quantitative magnitude of these effects can be gauged using a macroeconometric model such as FRB/US--one of the models developed and maintained by Board staff and used routinely in simulations of alternative economic scenarios.
Figure 3 depicts the results of such a simulation exercise, as reported in a recent research paper by four Federal Reserve System economists.8 For illustrative purposes, the simulation imposes the assumption that the purchases of $600 billion in longer-term Treasury securities are completed within about a year, that the elevated level of securities holdings is then maintained for about two years, and that the asset position is then unwound linearly over the following five years.9 
This trajectory of securities holdings causes the 10-year Treasury yield to decline initially about 1/4 percentage point and then gradually return toward baseline over subsequent years.
That path of longer-term Treasury yields leads to a significant pickup in real gross domestic product (GDP) growth relative to baseline and generates an increase in nonfarm payroll employment that amounts to roughly 700,000 jobs.10 It should also be noted that this exercise is performed as a deterministic simulation and hence does not capture the potential benefits of the asset purchase program in mitigating downside risks to economic activity and inflation.
I would also like to note that the same research paper analyzed the macroeconomic effects of the FOMC's full program of securities purchases, including the first round of purchases that was initiated in late 2008 and early 2009, the modification of the reinvestment policy that was announced last August, and the second round of purchases that was initiated in November.
Those simulation results indicate that by 2012, the full program of securities purchases will have raised private payroll employment by about 3 million jobs.
Moreover, the simulations suggest that inflation is currently a percentage point higher than would have been the case if the FOMC had never initiated a securities purchases, implying that, in the absence of such purchases, the economy would now be close to deflation.11 
Has the Program Been Effective in Promoting the Economic Recovery?
Table 2 depicts financial market responses during three key phases in the rollout of the program: (1) August 10, 2010, when the FOMC announced that the Federal Reserve would begin reinvesting principal payments on agency MBS and agency debt by purchasing Treasury securities; (2) the period between August 11 and November 2; and (3) November 3, the date on which the FOMC meeting statement announced the commencement of the program.
As shown in the table, the initiation of the securities purchase program at the November FOMC meeting occasioned only minimal market response.
The reason is that it was largely anticipated by investors, having been the subject of extensive public discussions by Federal Reserve officials during late summer and early autumn.
Importantly, as expectations of the program gradually became embedded in asset prices during late summer and early autumn, the 10-year TIPS yield dropped nearly 1/2 percentage point over the period between the August and November FOMC meetings; moreover, equity prices rose and corporate bond spreads narrowed.
Over that period, of course, asset prices were also responding to economic news and some favorable corporate earnings reports, but the overall pattern of the financial market data bolstered my confidence in the effectiveness of the Federal Reserve's securities purchases in providing additional monetary policy accommodation.
Indeed, market rates might well have backed up significantly following the November FOMC meeting if the Committee had decided not to move ahead with the program.12 
As shown in figure 4, longer-term Treasury yields have risen substantially over the past couple of months since the FOMC initiated this round of asset purchases.
I believe that this increase in Treasury yields likely reflects a number of significant factors, including incoming information suggesting a somewhat stronger economic outlook and the fiscal package that was announced by President Obama in early December and approved by the Congress about two weeks later; that package will not only support economic growth next year but will also increase the amount of federal debt issuance.
Also, investors appear to have scaled back their expectations about the extent to which the FOMC will engage in further purchases beyond those already announced; however, the effect of that reassessment on market rates tends to bolster the view that the Federal Reserve's securities purchases do indeed affect yields in the direction indicated by analytical and empirical studies.13 
A concern voiced by some observers is that the asset purchase program will lead to excessive inflation.
One rationale for this view is that the economy is currently operating with little slack--that is, an unemployment rate that is not far from the NAIRU.
A second rationale is that asset purchases have ballooned the Fed's balance sheet and the supply of bank reserves.
economy is operating close to the NAIRU point to an apparent outward shift in the Beveridge curve--the relationship between job vacancies and unemployment--as indicating an increase in the structural level of unemployment.
In the simplest framework, movements along a downward sloping Beveridge curve are typically characterized as cyclical movements in labor market conditions, while persistent inward and outward shifts in the curve are frequently attributed to structural forces.
However, the Beveridge curve can shift out for a variety of reasons, including some that are essentially cyclical in nature, so it is important to understand the sources of a shift to assess whether it represents persistent structural forces.
In particular, weak labor demand may be causing the labor market to operate less efficiently than would typically be the case, and matching efficiency may return to normal as demand for workers improves.
Indeed, historically, matching efficiency does appear to move back toward its long-run average over time.15 That said, a persistently high level of long-term unemployment could lead to a significant increase in structural unemployment over time as individuals who are out of work for long periods face the erosion of their skills.
However, such effects would take time to materialize and, in any event, would argue for aggressive policies to reduce unemployment promptly.
Another portion of the recent outward shift in the Beveridge curve is likely due to increases in the maximum duration of unemployment benefits, which may have induced some unemployed workers to be more selective in the job offers they accept.
However, recent research suggests that the increase in unemployment due to extended benefits is probably small relative to the overall increase in unemployment, and, regardless of its magnitude, the influence of extended unemployment benefits will disappear as the economy improves and extended benefits expire.16 
For example, vacancies typically adjust more quickly than unemployment to changes in labor demand, causing counterclockwise movements in vacancy-unemployment space that can look like shifts in the Beveridge curve.
Finally, it is worth emphasizing that most of the co-movement between unemployment and vacancies in recent years does not appear especially unusual.
In particular, low vacancies and elevated layoffs--likely driven by weak labor demand--can account for much of the increase in unemployment that has occurred since mid-2008.17 This observation is in accord with the recent behavior of inflation, which, as noted above, has trended down over the past three years, consistent with a decline in rates of resource utilization.
Likewise, nominal wage growth has fallen noticeably over the past several years and remains quite low.
In sum, while deficient labor demand may not be the only factor boosting unemployment currently, and while disentangling the various influences on unemployment is not straightforward, weak labor demand appears to be the predominant factor keeping the unemployment rate elevated.
This weakness, in turn, implies that current resource utilization is likely well below normal levels, mitigating the risk that the policy stimulus from our asset purchase program will lead to excessive inflation.
A second reason that some observers worry that the Fed's asset purchase programs could raise inflation is that these programs have increased the quantity of bank reserves far above pre-crisis levels.
I strongly agree with one aspect of this argument--the notion that an accommodative monetary policy left in place too long can cause inflation to rise to undesirable levels.
This notion would be true regardless of the level of bank reserves and pertains as well in situations in which monetary policy is unconstrained by the zero bound on interest rates.
Indeed, it is one reason why the Committee stated that it will review its asset purchase program regularly in light of incoming information and adjust the program as needed to meet its objectives.
We recognize that the FOMC must withdraw monetary stimulus once the recovery has taken hold and the economy is improving at a healthy pace.
Importantly, the Committee remains unwaveringly committed to price stability and does not seek inflation above the level of 2 percent or a bit less than that, which most FOMC participants see as consistent with the Federal Reserve's mandate.
In contrast, I disagree with the notion that the large quantity of reserves resulting from our asset purchases poses some special barrier to removing policy stimulus when the right time comes.
The FOMC will be able to increase short-term rates by raising the interest rate that we pay on excess reserves--currently 1/4 percent.
That ability will allow us to manage short-term interest rates effectively and thus to tighten policy when needed, even if bank reserves remain high.
Given the very high level of reserve balances, changes in the interest rate on reserves might not be fully reflected in the federal funds rate and other short-term market rates.
In that event, the Federal Reserve can use tools it has developed and tested to drain or immobilize bank reserves, thereby enhancing our control over the federal funds rate.
To build the capability to drain large quantities of reserves, the Federal Reserve has expanded the range of its counterparties for reverse repurchase operations beyond the primary dealers and has developed the infrastructure necessary to use agency MBS as collateral in such transactions.
The Federal Reserve has also put in place a Term Deposit Facility through which it can offer deposits to member institutions that are roughly analogous to the certificates of deposit that these institutions offer to their customers.
The use of reverse repurchase operations and the Term Deposit Facility would allow the Federal Reserve to drain hundreds of billions of dollars of reserves from the banking system should conditions necessitate.
Finally, we can sell portions of our holdings of MBS, agency debt, and Treasury securities if we determine that doing so is an appropriate way of tightening financial conditions when the time comes.
The redemption or sale of securities would have the effect of reducing the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet as well as further reducing the quantity of reserves in the banking system.
Restoring the size and composition of the balance sheet to a more normal configuration is a longer-term objective of our policies.
Any such sales would be at a gradual pace, would be clearly communicated to market participants, and would entail appropriate consideration of economic conditions.
In short, the range of tools we have developed will permit us to raise short-term interest rates and drain large volumes of reserves when it becomes necessary to achieve the policy stance that fosters our macroeconomic objectives--including the objective of maintaining price stability.
Will the Asset Purchase Program Result in Adverse Financial Imbalances?
The Committee's intention in implementing asset purchases is to hold down the level of longer-term interest rates to make credit more affordable for businesses and households.
A reasonable fear is that this process could go too far, encouraging potential borrowers to employ excessive leverage to take advantage of low financing costs and leading investors to accept less compensation for bearing risks as they seek to enhance their rates of return in an environment of very low yields.
This concern deserves to be taken seriously, and the Federal Reserve is carefully monitoring financial indicators for signs of potential threats to financial stability.
While there is no single metric we can use to assess these threats, standard financial market indicators do not currently signal significant excesses or imbalances in the United States.
In fixed-income markets, narrow risk spreads and risk premiums could be signs of excessive risk-taking by investors, and indeed spreads on corporate bonds have dropped dramatically since the financial crisis, as the economic outlook has improved and investor sentiment has picked up.
Risk premiums on nonfinancial corporate bonds, as measured by forward spreads far in the future, are relatively low compared with historical norms, although other indicators for this market do not point to overvaluation.
An alternative way to identify imbalances is to focus more directly on measuring credit flows and exposures to credit risk.
Extraordinarily rapid credit growth may be a sign that financial institutions are taking greater risks onto their balance sheets.
In recent months, nonfinancial corporations have issued large amounts of bonds and syndicated leveraged loans, and banks' provision of consumer credit has shown some signs of reviving.
Nonetheless, a portion of the recent corporate issuance has been used to refinance existing debt, including leveraged loans; small business lending remains especially weak; and commercial and residential mortgage originations continue to shrink.
Thus, there is little evidence that financial institutions are significantly expanding the level of credit and liquidity provided to households and businesses on net.
Indeed, given the current very low level of interest rates and the continuation of the economic recovery, credit flows remain stubbornly sluggish.
Of course, such aggregate measures provide only an imperfect picture of overall credit conditions.
Another type of evidence comes from surveying market participants about their practices.
For bank lending, we have the Federal Reserve's Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, which provides information about changes in supply and demand for bank loans to businesses and households.
Recent surveys have indicated that banks have only just begun to reverse the historically large tightening in standards and terms that they implemented in the aftermath of the crisis.
In fact, considerably more easing of terms and standards will probably be required before lending conditions return to normal.
To monitor leverage provided by dealers to financial market participants, last June the Federal Reserve launched the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms.
This survey provides information on credit terms and availability of various forms of dealer-intermediated financing, including funding for securities positions and over-the-counter derivatives.
These results indicate that the availability and use of leverage by nonbank financial institutions increased somewhat last year.
The Federal Reserve is closely monitoring many indicators of financial conditions to better understand the implications of financial market developments for the economy as well as risks to the financial system itself.
We are working with other regulators to make the financial system more robust and are attentive in our supervision to developments that may affect systemic risk.
If evidence of financial imbalances were to develop, I believe that supervision and regulation should provide the first line of defense so that monetary policy can concentrate on its longstanding goals of price stability and maximum employment.
That said, we cannot categorically rule out using monetary policy to address financial imbalances, given the damage that they can cause.
Will the Asset Purchase Program Have Adverse Effects on Foreign Economies?
My final FAQ relates to the concerns that some observers have expressed over the potential for the Federal Reserve's asset purchase program to have adverse effects on foreign economies.
One specific concern is that these securities purchases might drive down the value of the U.S.
Although purchases of longer-term securities are a less conventional means of conducting monetary policy than the more familiar approach of managing short-term interest rates, the goals and transmission mechanisms are actually very similar, and there is nothing special about these asset purchases that would make them especially likely to weigh on the dollar.
In fact, the evidence available to date suggests that the asset purchases have had only moderate effects on the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
This point is illustrated in table 3, which reports the change in U.S.
Indeed, as shown in figure 6, these exchange rate movements are very modest in the broader context of developments over the past several years.
A related concern raised by some observers is that the Federal Reserve's asset purchases may induce excessive capital inflows to emerging market economies (EMEs)--inflows that in turn could put unwelcome upward pressure on the currencies of those EMEs and perhaps even contribute to asset price bubbles.
As shown in figure 7, net private capital flows to Latin American and Asian EMEs (reported as a share of the aggregate GDP of those EMEs) were substantial in the second half of 2009 and the first half of 2010 but were not obviously outsized compared with levels prior to the crisis.18 A similar pattern is evident in figure 8, which depicts the net inflows since 2007 into mutual funds investing in EME bonds and equities.
Accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies, including the Federal Reserve's asset purchases, have likely played some role in widening interest rate differentials and encouraging capital flows to EMEs.
Other factors--including a reversal of the capital outflows from EMEs during the financial crisis and the EMEs' longer-term favorable growth prospects--likely have also been important.
Moreover, it would be a mistake to portray these capital flows as an unmitigated negative for the EMEs.
A rebalanced global economy in which EMEs depend more on domestic demand for their growth will likely involve ultimately stronger and more sustained capital flows to these economies.
Finally, I would like to comment on the critique that our asset purchase program is meant to promote U.S.
growth at the expense of other nations by depreciating the dollar and enhancing U.S.
That argument ignores the fact that stimulating growth in the United States is also likely to boost our demand for foreign goods and promote growth abroad.
This effect will provide an important offset to the other implication of U.S.
monetary stimulus that I discussed earlier--that it may lead to moderate movements in the foreign exchange value of the dollar that tend to lower U.S.
Whether foreign demand is ultimately boosted or diminished by U.S.
monetary policy depends on the relative sizes of these two effects and is ultimately an empirical question.19 However, given the moderate exchange rate effects that we believe the Federal Reserve's asset purchases have had, it seems likely to me that, as seems to be the case with conventional monetary easing achieved by lowering interest rates, our decision to purchase assets will not hinder foreign growth.
In particular, given the importance of the United States in the global economy, it is hard to believe that any foreign country would gain if our economy were to fall back into another recession.
Over the longer term, the health and vitality of the global economy will depend importantly on the sustained, vigorous recovery in the United States that our asset purchase program is intended to support.
In closing, let me reiterate that the program of asset purchases initiated by the Federal Open Market Committee in November is intended to support economic recovery from an exceptionally deep recession and to restore inflation to, but not above, levels that FOMC participants consider consistent with price stability.
I believe it will be effective in fostering maximum employment and price stability.
"What Drives Movements in the Unemployment Rate? A Decomposition of the Beveridge Curve (399 KB PDF)," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-148.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.
"The Term Structure of Interest Rates," Quarterly Journal of Economics, vol.
"Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-52, Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.
"Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? " Staff Report No.441.
"The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment (467 KB PDF) ," working paper.
"The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing (748 KB PDF) ," Working Paper 393.
Monetary Policy Shocks: Evidence from VAR's," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"Extended Unemployment and UI Benefits ," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, FRBSF Economic Letter, 2010-10, April 19.
"Liquidity Preference as Behavior towards Risk," Review of Economic Studies, vol.
"Country Spreads and Emerging Countries: Who Drives Whom? " Journal of International Economics, vol.
"A Preferred-Habitat Model of the Term Structure of Interest Rates ," NBER Working Paper Series 15487.
This downward trend in inflation has not been confined to any specific sectors of the economy, such as housing.
For example, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas constructs a trimmed-mean rate of PCE inflation by removing the tails of the distribution of monthly price changes for disaggregated spending categories.
That measure of underlying inflation has also declined fairly steadily since mid-2008 and dipped slightly below 1 percent last autumn.
Moreover, diffusion indexes of price changes--which subtract the percentage of items in the consumption basket with price increases from the percentage of items with price decreases--also fell noticeably over this period, providing further evidence that the decline in inflation has been widespread across many categories of consumer spending.
As indicated in the minutes of the November FOMC meeting, the Committee has also considered the potential costs and benefits of setting a peg for a term interest rate.
While targeting the yield on a term security could be an effective way to reduce longer-term interest rates, such an approach might require the Federal Reserve to make an open-ended commitment to purchasing longer-term securities.
A burgeoning literature focuses on the experience of asset purchase programs of the Federal Reserve and other central banks; for example, see D'Amico and King (2010); Gagnon, Raskin, Remache, and Sack (2010); Hamilton and Wu (2010); and Joyce, Lasaosa, Stevens, and Tong (2010).
Bernanke (2008), "Monetary Policy and Asset Prices Revisited," speech delivered at the Greater Austin Chamber of Commerce, Austin, Tex., December 1.
The December 2008 FOMC announcement also reported the Committee's decision to reduce the target for the federal funds rate to a range of 0 to 1/4 percent.
In addition, the federal funds rate is assumed to remain unchanged from baseline for several years and then to follow the prescriptions of a simple estimated policy rule; for further details, see Chung and others (2011).
The simulation results are reported as deviations from baseline and hence eventually return to zero.
In effect, under circumstances in which the baseline path involves a large and relatively persistent unemployment gap, these results can be interpreted as gauging the extent to which the policy stimulus accelerates the pace at which the economy returns to its balanced-growth path with maximum sustainable employment and low, stable inflation.
Consistent with the conjecture that bond yields are affected by expected purchase size, the 30-year Treasury yield increased markedly in the days following the November FOMC meeting, as market participants reportedly revised downward their expectations of the amount of purchases by the Federal Reserve in this maturity sector.
On changes in matching efficiency, see Barnichon and Figura (2010) and Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2010).
On the effect of extended unemployment benefits on the unemployment rate, see Kuang and Valleta (2010).
Declining demand leads businesses with positive trend growth in employment to reduce vacancies--a movement down the Beveridge curve--and businesses with flat or downwardly trending employment to increase layoffs--an outward shift in the Beveridge curve.
For the response of vacancies and layoffs to changes in firm-level employment, see Davis, Faberman, and Haltiwanger (2010).
Kim (2001), Canova (2005), and Uribe and Yue (2006), among others, find that U.S.
monetary stimulus affects aggregate output in emerging market and advanced foreign economies positively.

At the Maryland Bankers Association First Friday Economic Outlook Forum, Baltimore, Maryland
I am pleased to be here at the beginning of a new year to offer my assessment of recent economic developments and the economic outlook for 2011.
I also plan to discuss the actions that the Federal Reserve has been taking to support the economic recovery.
Before I begin, I want to emphasize that the views that I will be presenting are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or the Board of Governors.
economy began to emerge from the deepest recession of the post-World War II period--one that had been precipitated by a severe financial crisis.
Economic history teaches that such downturns typically are deeper, and that the pace of their subsequent recoveries is more moderate, than is the case for business cycles not associated with financial crises.
experience for the past year and a half: Real economic activity has been steadily recovering overall, but the speed and strength of the rebound have been restrained by significant financial headwinds.
Perhaps the most telling measure of the modest pace of the economic recovery is the painfully slow improvement in the labor market.
Indicators of hiring and job openings have continued to rise in recent months, and, more recently, new claims for unemployment insurance have begun falling again.
Still, 18 months into recovery, there are more than 7 million fewer jobs in the economy than there were just prior to the recession, and the unemployment rate remains stubbornly close to its peak.
American families have not experienced such a prolonged and severe period of unemployment since the early 1980s.
Manufacturing production, which rebounded sharply during the first year of the recovery, has continued to expand at a solid rate in recent months.
Moreover, with the recovery in economic activity abroad, exports have also been providing a boost to our manufacturing sector.
Consumer spending, which rose at only a modest rate in the first year of the recovery, has strengthened in recent months.
Personal consumption expenditures (PCE), adjusted for inflation, increased at an annual rate of 3-3/4 percent between June and November, with sales increasing across a relatively broad range of consumer goods and services.
The supply of consumer credit has also improved somewhat over the past year, although the terms and conditions for some types of consumer loans are still tight relative to historical norms.
The health of larger firms with access to capital markets has shown steady improvement over the past year.
Operating earnings per share for S&P 500 firms have been rising, net debt financing by nonfinancial corporations has been increasing, and indicators of corporate credit quality have continued to improve.
For these firms, the outlook appears positive: Recent surveys of purchasing managers across a range of manufacturing and nonmanufacturing firms indicated an increase in their plans for capital spending in the coming year.
Surveys of bank lending indicate that banks are no longer tightening credit terms for loans to small businesses, but interest rates on small business loans remain high relative to market rates, and outstanding volumes of small loans to businesses continue to decline.
According to the latest survey by the National Federation of Independent Business, small business owners see some improvement in credit availability, but they still have not seen the pickup in sales that would trigger more investment.
And while low mortgage interest rates have contributed to strong refinancing activity, many households are still unable to qualify for the loans with the most favorable terms due to depressed home values, reduced income, or weaker credit scores.
The commercial real estate market is also still quite anemic.
Also, issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities has turned up, albeit from a low level.
The federal fiscal stimulus of the past two years helped shore up this sector, but did not prevent significant cutbacks in services and employment that were associated with the steep decline in revenues sustained during the recession.
Nonetheless, these jurisdictions will continue to face significant pressures to satisfy balanced budget requirements and to rebuild their depleted reserve funds at the same time that federal stimulus grants are winding down.
With the recovery proceeding at a moderate rate and the margin of economic slack quite wide, the underlying rate of inflation has been trending lower despite upward pressure from rising costs of energy and other commodities and rising prices of imported goods.
In the 12 months ending in November, overall inflation in PCE prices was 1.0 percent, and the 12-month change in core PCE inflation, which excludes more-volatile food and energy costs, was just 0.8 percent.
Both measures show that inflation has drifted lower over the preceding year, and that slowing appears to have been broadly based.
Indeed, even after reviewing a number of measures of the underlying trend in inflation, I find it difficult to identify a single measure that doesn't show that inflation has drifted steadily lower.
At the same time, longer-run inflation expectations still appear to be stable.
Although the recovery continues to be uneven across sectors, recent economic and financial developments are broadly consistent with my forecast that the economic recovery will gain even more momentum and that the expansion will become sufficiently strong to gradually bring down the unemployment rate.
Given the currently high level of resource slack and my projection for only a gradual reduction in unemployment, I expect that inflation will remain subdued.
My forecast for continued growth in consumer spending is predicated on an assumption of ongoing recovery in wage and salary income that should accompany an expected pickup in hiring.
In addition, household balance sheets should gradually strengthen as asset prices firm and continued deleveraging reduces household debt.
To date, larger firms have contributed importantly to the recovery in business spending, and they seem well positioned for further investment.
Global economic activity rebounded rapidly during the initial stages of the recovery, buoyed by a bounceback in global trade and inventory restocking around the world.
Activity abroad has slowed more recently and seems to be settling on a sustainable path that still should result in rising demand for U.S.
My outlook for the housing market and for commercial real estate is more cautious.
A sustained recovery in income and jobs will be an important prerequisite for a recovery in the housing industry.
One important element of the outlook is my expectation that financial market functioning and lending conditions will continue to improve, providing additional support for a further pickup in consumer and business spending.
During the financial crisis, banks reported on our quarterly survey an extraordinary tightening of their lending standards.
As banks continue to repair their balance sheets and develop greater confidence in the economic outlook, I anticipate that standards will improve further over coming quarters.
One notable exception to my forecast for gradual improvement in financial markets is my expectation that residential mortgage markets could take a number of years to repair as policymakers and market participants grapple with the role of government in housing finance, adapt to changing regulation, and look for ways to better manage and price the risks associated with mortgage lending and servicing.
Based on all of these assumptions, I expect a gradual decline in unemployment this year and little change in the underlying rate of inflation.
The Congress has charged the Federal Reserve with two monetary policy objectives, known as our dual mandate--the achievement of maximum employment and price stability.
As I noted earlier, the financial crisis and severe recession left the economy far below levels of resource utilization consistent with maximum sustained employment.
And the wide margins of economic slack that have persisted have moved inflation below a level of 2 percent or a bit less, which is the rate that most FOMC participants see as consistent with our dual mandate.
In light of these disappointing results, monetary policy continues to be focused on ensuring that the economic recovery is sufficiently strong to sustain noticeable progress toward our mandated objectives.
I would like to take a few minutes to offer some perspectives on how monetary policy has been meeting this challenge.
As you know, the Federal Reserve responded forcefully to the financial crisis by employing a range of measures and programs to provide badly needed liquidity to financial institutions and markets.
At the same time, the FOMC used both standard and less-conventional forms of monetary policy to promote economic recovery and to preserve price stability.
The standard way in which the FOMC stimulates the economy is by reducing the target for the overnight federal funds rate and shaping expectations about future policy actions through the FOMC's statement and other communications.
Such policy actions typically lead to lower interest rates and a broader easing of financial conditions that together boost business and household spending and net exports.
However, after the FOMC lowered its target for the federal funds rate to near zero in December 2008, that conventional policy tool was essentially no longer available.
To provide additional accommodation, between December 2008 and March 2010, the FOMC elected to purchase large amounts of longer-term Treasury, agency, and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS).
Those purchases put downward pressure on longer-term interest rates generally and helped normalize the spread between mortgage rates and long-term Treasury rates, which had widened during the financial crisis.
Reducing longer-term rates influences the economy in much the same way as lowering the expected path of short-term rates.
For instance, the decline in longer-term rates lowers the cost and increases the availability of capital and credit, which in turn encourages business expansion.
In the most recent episode, another important result of lower rates has been a reduction in debt service burdens from existing debt.
Economic activity picked up in early 2010, but by the time the FOMC met in August, the rate of growth seemed to be slowing and inflation continued to drift lower.
In addition, lower mortgage rates were resulting in faster prepayment of mortgages underlying the agency MBS held by the Federal Reserve.
To avoid the modest monetary tightening that would result from the Fed's gradually shrinking portfolio of agency MBS, the FOMC voted to reinvest all principal payments from agency debt and agency MBS in longer-term Treasury securities.
The Committee also began a discussion about the strength of the recovery, the amount of slack in the economy, the likely path of inflation, and the appropriate action to provide additional monetary accommodation should such action be deemed necessary.
In November, the FOMC judged that additional monetary policy stimulus was needed to support the economic recovery and help ensure that inflation, over time, returned to desired levels.
To implement that stimulus, the Committee decided to expand its holdings of securities by purchasing an additional $600 billion in longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011.
After considering the costs and benefits of the action and recognizing that taking no action would have its own risks, I believe that the expansion of securities holdings was worth implementing to support the economy and make the recovery more durable.
While it is still premature to judge the overall efficacy of the program, I believe that by exerting downward pressure on longer-term interest rates, it has provided and will continue to provide support for a vulnerable recovery.
Based on our own research and that of others, evidence is accumulating that purchases of longer-term assets have been successful in exerting downward pressure on longer-term rates.1 Consistent with research on the effects of asset purchases, between August, when Chairman Bernanke in a speech first publicly suggested the Federal Reserve might take additional action, and November, when the action was taken, longer-term Treasury rates fell as market participants priced in additional Fed purchases.2 However, since the announcement of the decision to purchase longer-term Treasury securities, longer-term rates have actually increased.
It might seem that the recent increase in rates contradicts the view that Fed asset purchases put downward pressure on rates.
If the market expects the Fed to respond to weak economic conditions by buying more assets, investors bid up the assets and rates fall.
Conversely, if the market expects the economy to strengthen, investors ratchet back expectations for Fed purchases and reduce their bid for the assets, and rates rise.
I believe that the current rise in rates is due to exactly this latter circumstance--a strengthening in market participants' outlook for the economy and a corresponding decrease in the market's expectation for future accommodation.
One concern that has been raised about asset purchases is the resulting expansion of the Fed's balance sheet and the corresponding increase in reserves.
For example, some observers have noted that an increase in reserve balances could lead to an increase in the money supply, which would in turn generate inflation pressures.
Others have worried that elevated levels of reserve balances might make it difficult for the Federal Reserve to remove monetary accommodation at the appropriate time.
While we will need to remain alert to economic developments, I am convinced that we can and will manage these risks.
The monetary policy objective of asset purchases is to foster downward pressure on interest rates.
But assets are "paid for" by crediting the reserve balances of banks, generating higher levels of reserve balances in the banking system.
Reserves are relevant to the growth of the money supply because banks are required to hold a percentage of some types of deposits as reserves with the Federal Reserve.
Thus, the total amount of reserves in the banking system acts to cap maximum reservable deposits.
It is important to note that it is deposits, not reserve balances, that are included in the monetary aggregates used to measure the money supply.
For example, M1 is made up of currency, traveler's checks, demand deposits, and other checkable deposits, while M2 is made up of M1 plus savings, small time deposits, and retail money market mutual funds.
Moreover, the linkage between the level of reserve balances and the monetary aggregates in the current environment is quite weak.
You were probably taught, as I was, that the broad monetary aggregates increase when reserve balances increase because the larger volume of reserves supports increased lending, which in turn leads to a larger volume of reservable deposits.
As a result, the textbook linkage between reserve balances, bank loans, and transaction deposits just is not operative at present.
Fundamentally, the levels of M1 and M2 are determined by the strength of the economy and the preferences of businesses and consumers for money, which depend on the yields on monetary instruments and competing assets.
Recent experience has again illustrated the difficulty in identifying a reliable relationship between reserve balances and the monetary aggregates.
Even though Federal Reserve actions to fight the financial crisis and support the economic recovery added roughly $1 trillion to a base of about $43 billion in aggregate bank reserves, M1 and M2 rose at relatively moderate rates over the same period.
Going one step further, I should note that the linkage between the monetary aggregates and either real economic activity or inflation has been very weak over recent decades.
The lack of a reliable relationship between the monetary aggregates and the economy led the Federal Reserve to abandon M1 as a key policy instrument in the early 1980s and then to reduce the role of M2 as a policy instrument in the late 1980s and early 1990s.
Indeed, in a 2006 speech about the historic use of monetary aggregates in setting Federal Reserve policy, Chairman Bernanke pointed out that, "in practice, the difficulty has been that, in the United States, deregulation, financial innovation, and other factors have led to recurrent instability in the relationships between various monetary aggregates and other nominal variables."3 Still, my colleagues and I will be monitoring a wide range of financial and economic developments very closely--including the growth of the money supply, inflation, and many other financial and nonfinancial variables--and, based on a full assessment of those developments, the FOMC will withdraw monetary accommodation at the appropriate time.
My view is that the elevated reserve balances would be inflationary only if they prevented the FOMC from effectively removing monetary accommodation by raising interest rates when the time comes to remove such accommodation, and I am convinced that that will not be the case.
The FOMC has a number of tools at its disposal for raising interest rates.
When appropriate, the Federal Reserve can put upward pressure on interest rates by raising the rate it pays on reserve balances.
Overall, the recovery in economic activity to date has been uneven and has not been sufficient to reduce unemployment noticeably.
And I believe that sustained gains in consumer spending and business investment and a further easing of credit conditions will reinforce each other, leading to greater confidence and improving the prospects for an extended expansion that, over time, will reduce unemployment to a level consistent with full employment.
At the same time, I anticipate that inflation will remain subdued.
Finally, I believe that the actions taken by the FOMC to support the economic recovery are appropriate, and I am confident in our commitment to monitor economic conditions and take action as needed.
See, for example, Diana Hancock and Wayne Passmore (2011), "Did the Federal Reserve's MBS Purchase Program Lower Mortgage Rates?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2011-01 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January).
King (2010), "Flow and Stock Effects of Large-Scale Treasury Purchases," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-52 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September); Joseph Gagnon, Matthew Raskin, Julie Remache, and Brian Sack (2010), "Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? " Staff Report 441 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March); and James D.
Hamilton and Jing (Cynthia) Wu (2010), "The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment," working paper (San Diego: University of California, San Diego, August (revised November)).
Bernanke (2010), "The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at "Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26-28.
Bernanke (2006), "Monetary Aggregates and Monetary Policy at the Federal Reserve: A Historical Perspective," speech delivered at the Fourth ECB Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, Germany, November 10.

At the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia Payment Cards Center Conference, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
I am delighted to be here for the 10th anniversary of the establishment of the Payment Cards Center at the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia.
I would especially like to recognize Bob Hunt, director of the center, and his staff as well as the leadership of the Philadelphia Fed for providing such an outstanding forum for research, policy, and industry discussion in the important area of consumer credit and payments.
I plan to set the stage for this conference by focusing on three topics that are of particular interest to the Federal Reserve: changes in consumer credit, changes in the use of payment methods, and regulatory developments that affect both consumer credit and payments.
During the recent financial crisis, the Federal Reserve and other policymakers throughout the government took unprecedented actions to mitigate the fallout from severely distressed market conditions and support the flow of credit to consumers and businesses.
Nonetheless, the level of credit outstanding for households has been very slow to rebound and remains lower than it was at the onset of the crisis.
Still, it is worthwhile to examine the data and try to understand why credit growth is not more robust.
For this forum, I have chosen to focus my discussion on factors affecting the overall movements in credit card debt.
The bulk of revolving credit in the United States today is held in the form of credit card debt.
As the financial crisis developed in late 2008, the aggregate amount of credit card debt outstanding began to fall.
Revolving credit has dropped every month since that time and is currently about 15 percent lower than it was at the time of the Lehman Brothers Holdings bankruptcy.
Although our economy has experienced other long episodes in which revolving credit growth has slowed, we have never seen such a prolonged period of outright decline.
As overall consumer spending weakened significantly over the course of the recession and the early stages of the recovery, a proportionate decline in revolving credit used to finance purchases might actually have been expected.
However, the decrease in revolving credit appeared to outpace the contemporaneous decline in spending during the recession, and, so far in the recovery, revolving credit has continued to decrease even as spending has turned up.
Within this context, it is helpful to consider the three main reasons that net borrowing--that is, the change in credit outstanding--can decrease: First, households can charge less on their revolving accounts; second, households can pay off a larger share of their balances each month; or third, households can default on (or lenders can charge off) their existing balances.
Taking the three factors in reverse order, consider first the role of cardholder defaults.
As the economy weakened in 2008 and 2009, an increasing number of households found it difficult to pay their credit card bills on time.
Weakness in the housing market also contributed to financial strains, as many households could no longer easily tap into home equity to consolidate their card debt and lower their monthly payments.1 In this adverse economic environment, it is perhaps not surprising that the charge-off rate on credit cards more than doubled from about 4 percent in 2007 to more than 9 percent in 2009.
The rate of charge-offs has since declined from its peak but remains elevated.
All told, we estimate that the rise in charge-offs can account for about one-third of the net decline in revolving credit growth from 2007 to 2009.
Another possible explanation for the decline in outstanding balances might be that households, in an effort to repair their balance sheets or bring down their debt burdens, have begun paying down their credit card balances faster than usual.
Historically, households tend to repay their credit card balances at a faster rate during good economic times and tend to slow this rate when economic activity is weak.
In 2006, the rate of credit card repayment was well above its long-run trend, probably reflecting strong incomes as well as ample home equity that could be tapped to pay off more expensive card debt.
However, beginning in 2007, as housing markets weakened and unemployment climbed, households began to pay off their card debt at a significantly slower pace--a trend that extended into 2008 and 2009 as the economic downturn worsened.
All told, the drop in the payoff rate has been more pronounced than in the recessions of 1990-91 and 2000-01.
More recently, however, this trend has reversed, and as of August 2010, the repayment rate had risen to a more typical level.
While this increase likely reflects a gradual improvement in the ability of cardholders to repay their debt, it could also be attributed to a shift in the composition of cardholders in bank portfolios toward more creditworthy borrowers as charged-off accounts were replaced with new accounts underwritten using stricter criteria.
The bottom line is that accelerated payment rates on existing balances do not seem to have contributed importantly to the drop in credit card debt outstanding over the past couple of years.
Finally, consumers have been charging less on their credit cards.
According to industry statistics, the amount of money charged on credit cards for purchases or cash advances fell around 10 percent between the third quarter of 2008 and the first quarter of 2010.
When they did spend, they may have been less willing to borrow to fund consumption given their experiences during the financial crisis, expectations for weaker economic conditions, and continued uncertainty about job prospects.
Preliminary data from the 2007-09 Panel Survey of Consumer Finances (SCF) show a modest increase--from 35 percent in 2007 to more than 40 percent in 2009--in the share of households that believed that buying things on credit was a "bad idea." Further, those households whose views about buying on credit became more negative between 2007 and 2009 reported reducing their charges substantially more than other households.
Consumers also appear to be seeking less new credit: Applications for new credit accounts, as recorded in data from the national credit bureaus, remain significantly lower than were observed for most of the past decade.
Credit supply factors have also likely contributed to the decline in overall credit card outstanding balances.
Households may have charged less because they had less credit available.
In the SCF panel, about 44 percent of households with credit card debt in 2007 experienced a reduction in their credit limits by 2009.
Data from the national credit bureaus indicate that credit lines peaked in the third quarter of 2008 and continued to fall over the course of 2009 and 2010.
The average dollar value of combined credit lines available to cardholders fell from a high near $26,000 per cardholder in late 2008 to around $21,000 per cardholder by the third quarter of 2010, a decline of about 20 percent.
Moreover, SCF data indicate that changes in credit limits are indeed related to credit card spending: Among households whose credit limit declined, SCF data show that the median amount of monthly new charges fell from $200 in 2007 to $50 in 2009, while among households whose credit limit did not decline, the median amount of new charges rose from $150 to $200.
Although this relationship is not necessarily causal, credit line restrictions have likely played at least some role in the reduction in credit card borrowing.
Looking further at the supply side of credit card debt, card lenders did report retrenching during the financial crisis.
According to the Federal Reserve Board's quarterly Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices (SLOOS), large fractions of banks tightened standards and terms on new and existing credit card accounts throughout 2008 and 2009.2 In recent months, however, some banks reported having eased standards somewhat.
In the most recent survey, published in October 2010, about two-thirds of banks thought that credit standards for prime borrowers on credit card loans and other consumer loans either were at their longer-run averages or would return to them over the next two years.
In contrast, for nonprime borrowers, more than half of the respondents thought that standards would remain tighter through at least 2013 or would not return to longer-run norms for the foreseeable future.
In addition to reductions in existing credit lines, new credit card account solicitations also fell considerably during the recession.
By early 2009, offers to households for new credit cards had dropped to around one-fifth of their count in 2006.
In addition, consistent with the SLOOS, the data on credit card offers show that solicitations to borrowers with lower credit scores are rebounding more slowly than those to borrowers with higher scores.
Interest rates may have caused some households to reduce their credit card usage even if unused credit lines remained available.
Although credit card interest rates declined in line with broader interest rates early in the financial crisis, card rates diverged from the broader rate environment by reversing this decline during 2009.
Some of the rate increase likely reflects a rise in charge-offs, which increases card issuers' costs of providing credit.
However, the divergence from rates on other forms of credit that also experienced higher charge-offs indicates that a portion of the increase may have been in anticipation of regulatory changes, which I will discuss a bit later, that will restrict some card issuers' ability to reprice credit.
Overall, then, the available data lead me to conclude that, in large part, the decline in revolving consumer credit outstanding is due to a combination of higher charge-offs, tighter credit, and less consumer willingness to take on debt, but probably not to widespread increases in discretionary paydowns of existing debt.
Although households account for the vast majority of credit card loans and credit card spending in our economy, the market for small business credit cards has grown considerably over the past 10 to 15 years.
After checking accounts, credit cards are the second-most-common financial product used by small businesses.
Also, small business cards often have higher credit limits than personal cards to facilitate the higher spending needs of small businesses.
Small businesses are noticeably less likely than households to carry a balance on their cards.
As of the end of 2009, 83 percent of small businesses used credit cards.
Of those using credit cards, 64 percent used small business cards and 41 percent used personal cards.
Despite the widespread use of credit cards, only a minority of small businesses--18 percent--reported borrowing on credit cards.
In comparison, nearly one-half of households reported carrying a balance on their credit cards.3 Thus, although most small businesses appear to use credit cards for transactions purposes, and perhaps as a source of short-term credit, the data suggest that only a small fraction of them rely on credit cards as a source of longer-term credit.
Yet even if firms do not carry a balance, reductions in the size of their credit card lines may strain their cash flow and force them to cut spending or require them to use more expensive forms of short-term credit, such as trade finance.
Consumer credit pricing and availability also appear to affect consumer preferences for different payment methods.
When consumers decide how to pay for their purchases, they may have a variety of payment options to choose from, including cash, checks, debit cards, credit cards, prepaid cards, and even, increasingly, their mobile phones.
The Federal Reserve has tracked changes in consumers' use of payment instruments in a number of studies over the past decade.
These studies cast an interesting light on the effects that weakened economic conditions have had on the mix of payments.
The number of checks processed in the United States has been declining since the late 1990s, as consumers, businesses, and governments have shifted away from checks and toward electronic payment methods.
At the same time, the use of debit and credit cards has risen.
Debit card payments, in particular, have grown remarkably: Between 2000 and 2008, the number of debit card transactions grew at an annual rate of more than 17 percent, while the value of debit card transactions grew 15 percent per year.
Credit card transactions have grown at a slower pace than debit card transactions over the same period--about 2 percent per year in number and roughly 5 percent per year in value.
Although the nature of cash makes direct measurement of aggregate cash payments difficult, we can infer a trend in usage from changes in the level of small-denomination currency that is most frequently used in cash payments.
Most interestingly, the recent period of economic weakness appears to have caused some consumers to shift away from credit cards not only as a source of credit but also as a method of payment.
As I said earlier, between late 2008 and early 2010, the value of credit card purchases declined 10 percent.
In comparison, although the rate of growth in debit card use slowed during the recession, debit card transactions did not decline in either volume or value.
This shift from credit to debit makes sense from the perspective of the consumer.
If credit is tight and consumption is contracting, consumers who are reluctant or unable to increase their debt levels can use debit cards to pay for current expenses out of current, rather than future, income.
In addition, for individuals with existing credit card balances, interest must be paid on new purchases as well as on previous balances.
Those individuals might seek to avoid interest charges on new purchases by using debit cards.
This incentive is even stronger in the presence of higher credit card interest rates.
In addition to the economic recession and recovery, the regulations governing consumer payment and credit products changed significantly in the past few years.
So it is especially difficult to separate the effects of economic conditions from regulatory effects on credit and debit card usage.
In December 2008, the Federal Reserve issued rules that introduced new consumer protections and revised the disclosures that consumers receive in connection with their credit card accounts.
Then, in May 2009, the Congress enacted the Credit Card Accountability Responsibility and Disclosure (Credit CARD) Act, which contained additional provisions regarding credit cards and gift cards.
Collectively, these rules have comprehensively overhauled the regulatory regime that applies to credit cards.
In large part, these reforms developed in response to concerns about the growing complexity of the products offered to consumers and concerns that consumers could not accurately assess the costs associated with their credit cards.
To address these concerns, the Federal Reserve used extensive consumer testing to develop new disclosures to be provided with credit card solicitations and in periodic statements.
The resulting disclosure requirements establish a new baseline for transparency in the credit card industry.
In addition, the new rules ban certain practices that increase the cost of credit in ways that cannot easily be disclosed to consumers, such as double-cycle billing.
The new rules also generally prohibit card issuers from increasing interest rates applied to existing balances and require issuers to provide adequate notice of higher rates to be applied to future balances.
It is too early to draw conclusions about the ultimate impact of these changes because many of the new requirements have been in effect only since earlier this year.
For example, card issuers appear to have changed their credit card pricing and underwriting models as their ability to use penalty pricing has been reduced.
And some of the reduction in new account solicitations may also be due in part to the regulatory changes.
But, in light of the concurrent changes in charge-off rates, economic conditions, and regulatory requirements, it is hard to separate the relative effects of each.
One way to assess the effects of regulation alone might be to watch the relative developments in business credit cards in comparison to consumer credit cards.
Credit cards issued primarily for business or commercial purposes generally are not governed by the consumer protections in the Truth in Lending Act or the amendments to that act in the 2009 Credit CARD Act.
At the same time, some business owners and professionals might find the higher credit line availability or other terms offered on business cards to be more attractive than using their personal cards for business expenses.
The federal banking agencies have sufficient supervisory and enforcement authority to ensure that issuers market and issue business cards only to borrowers who they have legitimate reason to believe are using them for business purposes.
Aside from credit cards, the regulatory landscape is also changing for other payment products.
The Federal Reserve has recently issued regulations that prohibit consumers from being automatically enrolled in overdraft programs for overdrafts created by automated teller machine withdrawals and one-time debit card transactions.
We have also implemented new protections under the Credit CARD Act that restrict the fees and expiration dates that apply to gift cards.4 
The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act requires the Federal Reserve to develop standards for debit card interchange fees and the routing of debit card transactions.
I am aware of the high level of interest in this topic, and I recognize the importance of the statute and its implementation for the future development of the payment card industry.
Just as credit card products have undergone change in response to the new credit card rules, new regulations affecting debit card overdrafts and interchange fees are likely to result in some changes in deposit product pricing and design.
For example, depository institutions have stated that they are reconsidering their ability to offer free or low-cost checking accounts if losses due to lower revenue from overdraft or interchange fees materialize.
As the pricing of checking accounts changes, financial institutions and consumers may turn to certain types of reloadable prepaid cards as checking account alternatives.
While the pace of the economic recovery and the effects of new consumer regulations are strongly influencing lender and consumer behavior, the evolution in the consumer credit and payments landscape in the years ahead will be equally shaped by technological innovation.
Innovative product and system design in the payment card marketplace continues to produce new electronic payment products.
Preliminary estimates from the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston's 2009 Survey of Consumer Payment Choice indicate that about one-third of consumers sampled reported having a prepaid card of some type.
Offering functionality similar to credit and debit cards, prepaid cards include a variety of products targeted to different groups of customers, from general-purpose reloadable cards that may serve as deposit account substitutes for the unbanked or the underbanked to more-limited-purpose products, such as gift cards, teen spending cards, or mass transit cards.
And of course, the idea behind prepaid cards is not limited to being in card form; their function also may show up in the form of codes, stickers, cell phones, and chips embedded in any number of other devices, with payments transferring across the debit card interchange system or automated clearinghouse systems.
Depending on the card type, the issuer, the purpose of issuance, the payment collection network, and the form of access, payments made using prepaid cards or other devices may be governed by different regulations and interchange fee restrictions.
It will be important for regulators to monitor, over time, the effect of differences in regulation and pricing restrictions to ensure that consumers are adequately protected regardless of their payment method preferences.
Other emerging payment methods, such as mobile payments, also show potential for broad adoption in the United States.
Earlier this year, the Federal Reserve Board hosted a forum on consumer protection and education issues associated with mobile payment methods.
The Reserve Banks, including the Reserve Bank of Philadelphia through the efforts of the Payment Cards Center, have also been active in soliciting information from industry participants on the roles that various players are taking on in U.S.
mobile payments and the forces that are affecting the rate of adoption by card issuers, merchants, networks, telecommunication firms, consumers, and others.
As of yet, mobile payments do not represent a meaningful percentage of overall consumer payments in the United States, but the Federal Reserve remains engaged in monitoring the emergence of this product to ensure that adequate consumer protections are put in place as the technology is adopted more broadly in the marketplace.
In closing, I encourage you to continue to push forward on research and policy work in the area of consumer credit and payments.
You have some very interesting conversations ahead of you during this conference and quite challenging work for the foreseeable future as these markets continue to evolve.
See the Federal Reserve Board's Report to the Congress on the Use of Credit Cards by Small Businesses and the Credit Card Market for Small Businesses (May 2010).
For more information on the new rules concerning credit cards and other payment products, see the "What You Need to Know" publication series.

At the Committee for Economic Development 2010 International Counterparts Conference, New York, New York
 The Committee for Economic Development has a long and distinguished record in identifying and addressing crucial issues related to our nation's economic growth and productivity.
 And today's conference on fiscal sustainability and the global economy fits squarely within that tradition.
 My remarks will focus on the challenges faced by U.S.
policymakers as they confront the need to put fiscal policy on a sustainable track in the long term while providing support to the economy in the near term.
 I will also offer some thoughts on the recent actions undertaken by the Federal Reserve and on the implications of our nation's fiscal and monetary policy choices for the global economy.1 
The Challenge of Achieving Fiscal Sustainability in the United States
Charting a sensible course for the federal budget is an essential but formidable task for U.S.
 Since the onset of the recent recession and financial crisis, the federal budget deficit has soared as the weak economy has depressed revenues and pushed up expenditures and as necessary policy actions have been taken to help ease the recession and shore up the financial system.
 As a result of the recent deficits, federal debt held by the public has increased to around 60 percent of GDP--a level not seen in 60 years.
 So long as the economy and financial markets continue to recover, the deficit should narrow relative to GDP over the next few years as a growing economy boosts revenues and reduces safety-net expenditures and as the policies put in place to provide economic stimulus and promote financial stability wind down.
 That said, the budget situation over the longer run presents some very difficult challenges, in part because the aging of the U.S.
 Admittedly, the ability of budget analysts to forecast the trajectory of health-care spending is limited, but it is prudent to assume that federal health spending per beneficiary will continue to rise faster than per capita GDP for the foreseeable future.
In a nutshell, the problem is that, in the absence of significant policy changes, and under reasonable assumptions about economic growth, demographics, and medical costs, federal spending will rise significantly faster than federal tax revenues in coming years.
 As a result, if current policy settings are maintained, the budget will be on an unsustainable path, with the ratio of federal debt held by the public to national income rising rapidly.
A failure to address these fiscal challenges would expose the United States to serious economic costs and risks.
 A high and rising level of government debt relative to national income is likely to eventually put upward pressure on interest rates, thereby restraining capital formation, productivity, and economic growth.
 Indeed, once the economy has recovered from its downturn, fiscal deficits will crowd out private spending.
 Large fiscal deficits will also likely put upward pressure on our current account deficits with the rest of the world; the associated greater reliance on borrowing from abroad means that an increasing share of our future income will be required to make interest payments on federal debt held abroad, thereby reducing the amount of income available for domestic spending and investment.
 A large federal debt will also limit the ability and flexibility of policymakers to address future economic stresses and other emergencies, a risk that is underscored by the critical fiscal policy actions that were taken to buffer the effects of the recent recession and stabilize financial markets in the wake of the crisis.
 And a prolonged failure by policymakers to address America's fiscal challenges could eventually undermine confidence in U.S.
I do not underestimate the difficulty of crafting a long-range budget plan that will both garner sufficient political support and have sound economic foundations.
 Nonetheless, I am encouraged that the debate seems to be moving forward and is starting to touch on some broad principles that--if followed--would improve economic growth and make achieving sustainable fiscal policies at least somewhat easier.
 Perhaps the most fundamental question that must be faced concerns the size and scope of the federal government--that is, how much of the nation's economic resources we will devote to federal programs, including transfer programs such as Social Security, Medicare, and Medicaid.
 Crucially, whatever size of government we choose, taxes must ultimately be set at a level sufficient to achieve an appropriate balance of spending and revenues.
 Moreover, the sooner we start addressing the longer-term budget problem, the less wrenching the adjustment will have to be and the more control we--rather than market forces or international creditors--will have over the timing, size, and composition of the necessary adjustments.

That said, it is important to recognize that fiscal tightening, were it to occur prematurely, could retard an already tepid economic recovery.
 We need, and I believe there is scope for, an approach to fiscal policy that puts in place a well-timed and credible plan to bring deficits down to sustainable levels over the medium and long terms while also addressing the economy's short-term needs.
economic performance continues to be impaired by the lingering effects of the financial crisis.
 The economy remains far from full employment even though a year and a half has elapsed since the trough of the business cycle.
 Job gains have continued to be subpar, and the unemployment rate remains near its highest level since the early 1980s; moreover, given the slow pace of economic growth, unemployment is likely to remain high for some time.
 Meanwhile, measures of underlying inflation have continued to trend lower and are now below the levels the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judges to be consistent, over the longer run, with its statutory mandate of maximum employment and price stability.

In this context, the Federal Reserve decided at its November meeting to undertake additional monetary policy actions to satisfy its dual mandate.
 After weighing carefully the uncertainties and risks, the FOMC decided to further expand the Federal Reserve's holdings of longer-term Treasury securities.
 The objective of this action is to reduce longer-term interest rates, thereby promoting a stronger pace of economic growth.
 The purchase of longer-term securities, while in some ways "unconventional," is actually quite similar to the Fed's traditional approach to monetary policy, which involves lowering the overnight federal funds rate by increasing the supply of reserve balances.
With the federal funds rate now effectively pinned at zero, purchases of longer-term securities are intended to push down rates further out the yield curve.
 By bolstering activity in the United States and mitigating risks that could threaten the recovery, this policy should also provide support for a sustained expansion of the global economy.
 The Committee, of course, recognizes that at the appropriate time, as the economy more fully recovers, the Federal Reserve will need to remove this extraordinary monetary accommodation in order to maintain price stability and keep inflation expectations well anchored.
 I am confident that the Federal Reserve has both the commitment and the tools to achieve this unwinding.
I strongly supported the Federal Reserve's recent action because I believe it will be helpful in strengthening the recovery.
 Indeed, some budget experts are exploring the idea of explicitly coupling fiscal stimulus in the near term, when unemployment is high and resource utilization is low, with specific deficit-reducing actions that take effect at scheduled future times, when output and employment are expected to have moved closer to their potential.
 Although a plan of this type might be challenging to develop and implement, it could provide an effective means to support economic activity in the short run while moving toward fiscal sustainability over time.
Because the focus of this conference is on fiscal adjustments and the global economy, let me now try to place this discussion of U.S.
 The process of long-run fiscal consolidation in the United States would likely entail higher national saving relative to investment, which should have the direct effect of restraining U.S.
 More generally, by lowering interest rates, fiscal consolidation should diminish net capital inflows into the United States, thereby reducing the current account deficit in this country and current account surpluses elsewhere.
 The resulting pattern of international debt accumulation and capital flows would be more balanced than at present, promoting a more sustainable pattern of growth in the global economy.

Although the fiscal consolidation process is just beginning, the weakness of private demand in the United States and other advanced economies, combined with robust growth in the emerging market economies, has led to a two-speed global recovery that already is creating pressures toward rebalancing.
 The advanced economies started their recoveries in 2009, but economic growth has barely exceeded the growth rate of potential output; as a result, the level of output in most advanced economies, including the United States, is still well below its potential.
 Forecasts suggest that growth and resource utilization will remain lackluster in the advanced economies for some time.
 Furthermore, inflation pressures in most other advanced countries, as in the United States, remain quite low, reflecting the existence of substantial economic slack.

In contrast to the subdued pace of recovery in the advanced economies, economic activity in the emerging market economies has rebounded sharply, and the level of output in most of those economies now well exceeds pre-crisis levels.
 The consequence is that policymakers in emerging market countries have turned their attention to the threat of rising inflation and have begun tightening monetary policy.
The stronger growth prospects in the emerging market economies, coupled with the tightening stance of their monetary policies, appear to be contributing to a resurgence of capital inflows to these economies.
 Sizeable differentials in expected returns between advanced and emerging market economies also seem to be reinforcing these flows and causing emerging market currencies to rise.
 In light of their increasing concerns about inflation, a case can be made that emerging market policymakers should welcome currency appreciation because it reduces inflation pressures and, over time, aids global rebalancing.
 However, some of them have argued that unduly large and rapid capital inflows may lead to asset-price bubbles and expose the financial sectors in their economies to a subsequent reversal of these flows, while rapid currency appreciation could derail the growth of their export sectors.
 A number of emerging market economies have accordingly attempted to counter the effects of financial inflows through a range of policies, including foreign exchange intervention and capital controls.
fiscal program that I discussed earlier might also moderate the pressures emerging market economies are experiencing at present.
growth would boost our demand for foreign goods and reduce the incentives for capital flows to emerging markets, thereby diminishing some of the upward pressure on emerging market currencies.
fiscal program would lessen for a time the natural mechanisms pushing the emerging markets to rebalance their economies toward domestic demand, even as it helped put the global economy as a whole on a more solid footing.
 It is also important for both advanced and emerging market economies to begin planning now for the structural reforms that will eventually be needed to promote rebalancing.
As I hope I've made clear, the challenge for U.S.
policymakers will be to craft a strategy that puts our fiscal policy on a sustainable path in the longer term while helping support the recovery in economic activity in the near term.
 Moreover, making progress on them would not only provide important benefits to the United States; it would also help foster a stronger world economy in the near term and a better global balance in spending, production, saving, and borrowing over time.

 My remarks reflect my own views and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).

At the Sixth European Central Bank Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, Germany
The last time I was here at the European Central Bank (ECB), almost exactly two years ago, I sat on a distinguished panel much like this one to help mark the 10th anniversary of the euro.
Even as we celebrated the remarkable achievements of the founders of the common currency, however, the global economy stood near the precipice.
Financial markets were volatile and illiquid, and the viability of some of the world's leading financial institutions had been called into question.
With asset prices falling and the flow of credit to the nonfinancial sector constricted, most of the world's economies had entered what would prove to be a sharp and protracted economic downturn.
By the time of that meeting, the world's central banks had already taken significant steps to stabilize financial markets and to mitigate the worst effects of the recession, and they would go on to do much more.
Very broadly, the responses of central banks to the crisis fell into two classes.
First, central banks undertook a range of initiatives to restore normal functioning to financial markets and to strengthen the banking system.
They expanded existing lending facilities and created new facilities to provide liquidity to the financial sector.
Key examples include the ECB's one-year long-term refinancing operations, the Federal Reserve's auctions of discount window credit (via the Term Auction Facility), and the Bank of Japan's more recent extension of its liquidity supply operations.
To help satisfy banks' funding needs in multiple currencies, central banks established liquidity swap lines that allowed them to draw each other's currencies and lend those funds to financial institutions in their jurisdictions; the Federal Reserve ultimately established swap lines with 14 other central banks.
Central banks also worked to stabilize financial markets that were important conduits of credit to the nonfinancial sector.
For example, the Federal Reserve launched facilities to help stabilize the commercial paper market and the market for asset-backed securities, through which flow much of the funding for student, auto, credit card, and small business loans as well as for commercial mortgages.
In addition, the Federal Reserve, the ECB, the Bank of England, the Swiss National Bank, and other central banks played important roles in stabilizing and strengthening their respective banking systems.
In particular, central banks helped develop and oversee stress tests that assessed banks' vulnerabilities and capital needs.
Central banks are also playing an important ongoing role in the development of new international capital and liquidity standards for the banking system that will help protect against future crises.
Second, beyond necessary measures to stabilize financial markets and banking systems, central banks moved proactively to ease monetary policy to help support their economies.
Initially, monetary policy was eased through the conventional means of cuts in short-term policy rates, including a coordinated rate cut in October 2008 by the Federal Reserve, the ECB, and other leading central banks.
However, as policy rates approached the zero lower bound, central banks eased policy by additional means.
For example, some central banks, including the Federal Reserve, sought to reduce longer-term interest rates by communicating that policy rates were likely to remain low for some time.
A prominent example of the use of central bank communication to further ease policy was the Bank of Canada's conditional commitment to keep rates near zero until the end of the second quarter of 2010.1 To provide additional monetary accommodation, several central banks--among them the Federal Reserve, the Bank of England, the ECB, and the Bank of Japan--purchased significant quantities of financial assets, including government debt, mortgage-backed securities, or covered bonds, depending on the central bank.
Asset purchases seem to have been effective in easing financial conditions; for example, the evidence suggests that such purchases significantly lowered longer-term interest rates in both the United States and the United Kingdom.2 
Although the efforts of central banks to stabilize the financial system and provide monetary accommodation helped set the stage for recovery, economic growth rates in the advanced economies have been relatively weak.
Of course, the economic outlook varies importantly by country and region, and the policy responses to these developments among central banks have differed accordingly.
In the United States, we have seen a slowing of the pace of expansion since earlier this year.
The unemployment rate has remained close to 10 percent since mid-2009, with a substantial fraction of the unemployed out of work for six months or longer.
Moreover, inflation has been declining and is currently quite low, with measures of underlying inflation running close to 1 percent.
Although we project that economic growth will pick up and unemployment decline somewhat in the coming year, progress thus far has been disappointingly slow.

In this environment, the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) judged that additional monetary policy accommodation was needed to support the economic recovery and help ensure that inflation, over time, is at desired levels.
Accordingly, the FOMC announced earlier this month its intention to purchase an additional $600 billion of longer-term Treasury securities by the end of the second quarter of 2011, a pace of about $75 billion per month.
The Committee also will maintain its current policy of reinvesting principal payments from its securities holdings in longer-term Treasury securities.
Financial conditions eased notably in anticipation of the Committee's announcement, suggesting that this policy will be effective in promoting recovery.
As has been the case with more conventional monetary policy in the past, this policy action will be regularly reviewed in light of the evolving economic outlook and the Committee's assessment of the effects of its policies on the economy.
(My list is by no means exhaustive.) The first lesson is that, in a world in which the consequences of financial crises can be devastating, fostering financial stability is a critical part of overall macroeconomic management.
Accordingly, central banks and other financial regulators must be vigilant in monitoring financial markets and institutions for threats to systemic stability and diligent in taking steps to address such threats.
Supervision of individual financial institutions, macroprudential monitoring, and monetary policy are mutually reinforcing undertakings, with active involvement in one sphere providing crucial information and expertise for the others.
Indeed, at the Federal Reserve, we have restructured our financial supervisory functions so that staff members with expertise in a range of areas--including economics, financial markets, and supervision--work closely together in evaluating potential risks.
Second, the past two years have demonstrated the value of policy flexibility and openness to new approaches.
During the crisis, central banks were creative and innovative, developing programs that played a significant role in easing financial stress and supporting economic activity.
As the global financial system and national economies become increasingly complex and interdependent, novel policy challenges will continue to require innovative policy responses.
Third, as was the focus of my remarks two years ago, in addressing financial crises, international cooperation can be very helpful; indeed, given the global integration of financial markets, such cooperation is essential.
Central bankers worked closely together throughout the crisis and continue to do so.
Our frequent contact, whether in bilateral discussions or in international meetings, permits us to share our thinking, compare analyses, and stay informed of developments around the world.
It also enables us to move quickly when shared problems call for swift joint responses, such as the coordinated rate cuts and the creation of liquidity swap lines during the crisis.
These actions and others we've taken over the past few years underscore our resolve to work together to address our common economic challenges.
"Talking about Tomorrow's Monetary Policy Today," FRBSF Economic Letter 2009-35.
San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, November 9.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.
"Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports 441.
"The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment," (548 KB PDF) working paper.
"Evaluating the Effect of the Bank of Canada's Conditional Commitment Policy," (281 KB PDF) Bank of Canada Discussion Paper 2010-11.
"The Financial Market Impact of Quantitative Easing," (748 KB PDF) Working Paper 393.
Recent work at the Bank of Canada (see He, 2010) suggests that the bank's forward guidance may have pushed back expectations of when policy accommodation would be withdrawn.
For the United States, see Gagnon and others (2010), D'Amico and King (2010), and Hamilton and Wu (2010); for the United Kingdom, see Joyce and others (2010).

At the Sixth European Central Bank Central Banking Conference, Frankfurt, Germany
The global economy is now well into its second year of recovery from the deep recession triggered by the most devastating financial crisis since the Great Depression.
In the most intense phase of the crisis, as a financial conflagration threatened to engulf the global economy, policymakers in both advanced and emerging market economies found themselves confronting common challenges.
Amid this shared sense of urgency, national policy responses were forceful, timely, and mutually reinforcing.
This policy collaboration was essential in averting a much deeper global economic contraction and providing a foundation for renewed stability and growth.

Tensions among nations over economic policies have emerged and intensified, potentially threatening our ability to find global solutions to global problems.
One source of these tensions has been the bifurcated nature of the global economic recovery: Some economies have fully recouped their losses while others have lagged behind.
But at a deeper level, the tensions arise from the lack of an agreed-upon framework to ensure that national policies take appropriate account of interdependencies across countries and the interests of the international system as a whole.
Accordingly, the essential challenge for policymakers around the world is to work together to achieve a mutually beneficial outcome--namely, a robust global economic expansion that is balanced, sustainable, and less prone to crises.

International policy cooperation is especially difficult now because of the two-speed nature of the global recovery.
Specifically, as shown in figure 1, since the recovery began, economic growth in the emerging market economies (the dashed blue line) has far outstripped growth in the advanced economies (the solid red line).
These differences are partially attributable to longer-term differences in growth potential between the two groups of countries, but to a significant extent they also reflect the relatively weak pace of recovery thus far in the advanced economies.
This point is illustrated by figure 2, which shows the levels, as opposed to the growth rates, of real gross domestic product (GDP) for the two groups of countries.
In contrast, economic activity in the emerging market economies has not only fully made up the losses induced by the global recession, but is also rapidly approaching its pre-crisis trend.
To cite some illustrative numbers, if we were to extend forward from the end of 2007 the 10-year trends in output for the two groups of countries, we would find that the level of output in the advanced economies is currently about 8 percent below its longer-term trend, whereas economic activity in the emerging markets is only about 1-1/2 percent below the corresponding (but much steeper) trend line for that group of countries.
Indeed, for some emerging market economies, the crisis appears to have left little lasting imprint on growth.
In the United States, the recession officially ended in mid-2009, and--as shown in figure 3--real GDP growth was reasonably strong in the fourth quarter of 2009 and the first quarter of this year.
However, much of that growth appears to have stemmed from transitory factors, including inventory adjustments and fiscal stimulus.
Since the second quarter of this year, GDP growth has moderated to around 2 percent at an annual rate, less than the Federal Reserve's estimates of U.S.
unemployment rate (the solid black line) has stagnated for about eighteen months near 10 percent of the labor force, up from about 5 percent before the crisis; the increase of 5 percentage points in the U.S.
unemployment rate is roughly double that seen in the euro area, the United Kingdom, Japan, or Canada.

Long-term unemployment not only imposes extreme hardship on jobless people and their families, but, by eroding these workers' skills and weakening their attachment to the labor force, it may also convert what might otherwise be temporary cyclical unemployment into much more intractable long-term structural unemployment.
Low rates of resource utilization in the United States are creating disinflationary pressures.
As shown in figure 5, various measures of underlying inflation have been trending downward and are currently around 1 percent, which is below the rate of 2 percent or a bit less that most Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) participants judge as being most consistent with the Federal Reserve's policy objectives in the long run.1 With inflation expectations stable, and with levels of resource slack expected to remain high, inflation trends are expected to be quite subdued for some time.
Because the genesis of the financial crisis was in the United States and other advanced economies, the much weaker recovery in those economies compared with that in the emerging markets may not be entirely unexpected (although, given their traditional vulnerability to crises, the resilience of the emerging market economies over the past few years is both notable and encouraging).
What is clear is that the different cyclical positions of the advanced and emerging market economies call for different policy settings.
Although the details of the outlook vary among jurisdictions, most advanced economies still need accommodative policies to continue to lay the groundwork for a strong, durable recovery.
In contrast, emerging market economies increasingly face the challenge of maintaining robust growth while avoiding overheating, which may in some cases involve the measured withdrawal of policy stimulus.
Let me address the case of the United States specifically.
unemployment rate is high and, given the slow pace of economic growth, likely to remain so for some time.
Indeed, although I expect that growth will pick up and unemployment will decline somewhat next year, we cannot rule out the possibility that unemployment might rise further in the near term, creating added risks for the recovery.
Inflation has declined noticeably since the business cycle peak, and further disinflation could hinder the recovery.
In particular, with shorter-term nominal interest rates close to zero, declines in actual and expected inflation imply both higher realized and expected real interest rates, creating further drags on growth.2 In light of the significant risks to the economic recovery, to the health of the labor market, and to price stability, the FOMC decided that additional policy support was warranted.

The Federal Reserve's policy target for the federal funds rate has been near zero since December 2008, so another means of providing monetary accommodation has been necessary since that time.
Accordingly, the FOMC purchased Treasury and agency-backed securities on a large scale from December 2008 through March 2010, a policy that appears to have been quite successful in helping to stabilize the economy and support the recovery during that period.
In taking that action, the Committee seeks to support the economic recovery, promote a faster pace of job creation, and reduce the risk of a further decline in inflation that would prove damaging to the recovery.
Although securities purchases are a different tool for conducting monetary policy than the more familiar approach of managing the overnight interest rate, the goals and transmission mechanisms are very similar.
In particular, securities purchases by the central bank affect the economy primarily by lowering interest rates on securities of longer maturities, just as conventional monetary policy, by affecting the expected path of short-term rates, also influences longer-term rates.
As I noted, the evidence suggests that asset purchases can be an effective tool; indeed, financial conditions eased notably in anticipation of the Federal Reserve's policy announcement.
Incidentally, in my view, the use of the term "quantitative easing" to refer to the Federal Reserve's policies is inappropriate.
Quantitative easing typically refers to policies that seek to have effects by changing the quantity of bank reserves, a channel which seems relatively weak, at least in the U.S.
In contrast, securities purchases work by affecting the yields on the acquired securities and, via substitution effects in investors' portfolios, on a wider range of assets.
This policy tool will be used in a manner that is measured and responsive to economic conditions.
Importantly, the Committee remains unwaveringly committed to price stability and does not seek inflation above the level of 2 percent or a bit less that most FOMC participants see as consistent with the Federal Reserve's mandate.
In that regard, it bears emphasizing that the Federal Reserve has worked hard to ensure that it will not have any problems exiting from this program at the appropriate time.
The Fed's power to pay interest on banks' reserves held at the Federal Reserve will allow it to manage short-term interest rates effectively and thus to tighten policy when needed, even if bank reserves remain high.
Moreover, the Fed has invested considerable effort in developing tools that will allow it to drain or immobilize bank reserves as needed to facilitate the smooth withdrawal of policy accommodation when conditions warrant.
If necessary, the Committee could also tighten policy by redeeming or selling securities.
The foreign exchange value of the dollar has fluctuated considerably during the course of the crisis, driven by a range of factors.
A significant portion of these fluctuations has reflected changes in investor risk aversion, with the dollar tending to appreciate when risk aversion is high.
In particular, much of the decline over the summer in the foreign exchange value of the dollar reflected an unwinding of the increase in the dollar's value in the spring associated with the European sovereign debt crisis.
The dollar's role as a safe haven during periods of market stress stems in no small part from the underlying strength and stability that the U.S.
Fully aware of the important role that the dollar plays in the international monetary and financial system, the Committee believes that the best way to continue to deliver the strong economic fundamentals that underpin the value of the dollar, as well as to support the global recovery, is through policies that lead to a resumption of robust growth in a context of price stability in the United States.
In sum, on its current economic trajectory the United States runs the risk of seeing millions of workers unemployed or underemployed for many years.
Monetary policy is working in support of both economic recovery and price stability, but there are limits to what can be achieved by the central bank alone.
The Federal Reserve is nonpartisan and does not make recommendations regarding specific tax and spending programs.
However, in general terms, a fiscal program that combines near-term measures to enhance growth with strong, confidence-inducing steps to reduce longer-term structural deficits would be an important complement to the policies of the Federal Reserve.
The two-speed nature of the global recovery implies that different policy stances are appropriate for different groups of countries.
As I have noted, advanced economies generally need accommodative policies to sustain economic growth.
In the emerging market economies, by contrast, strong growth and incipient concerns about inflation have led to somewhat tighter policies.
Unfortunately, the differences in the cyclical positions and policy stances of the advanced and emerging market economies have intensified the challenges for policymakers around the globe.
Notably, in recent months, some officials in emerging market economies and elsewhere have argued that accommodative monetary policies in the advanced economies, especially the United States, have been producing negative spillover effects on their economies.
In particular, they are concerned that advanced economy policies are inducing excessive capital inflows to the emerging market economies, inflows that in turn put unwelcome upward pressure on emerging market currencies and threaten to create asset price bubbles.
As is evident in figure 6, net private capital flows to a selection of emerging market economies (based on national balance of payments data) have rebounded from the large outflows experienced during the worst of the crisis.
A narrower but timelier measure of demand for emerging market assets--net inflows to equity and bond funds investing in emerging markets, shown in figure 7--suggests that inflows of capital to emerging market economies have indeed picked up in recent months.
To a large degree, these capital flows have been driven by perceived return differentials that favor emerging markets, resulting from factors such as stronger expected growth--both in the short term and in the longer run--and higher interest rates, which reflect differences in policy settings as well as other forces.
As figures 6 and 7 show, even before the crisis, fast-growing emerging market economies were attractive destinations for cross-border investment.
However, beyond these fundamental factors, an important driver of the rapid capital inflows to some emerging markets is incomplete adjustment of exchange rates in those economies, which leads investors to anticipate additional returns arising from expected exchange rate appreciation.
The exchange rate adjustment is incomplete, in part, because the authorities in some emerging market economies have intervened in foreign exchange markets to prevent or slow the appreciation of their currencies.
The degree of intervention is illustrated for selected emerging market economies in figure 8.
The vertical axis of this graph shows the percent change in the real effective exchange rate in the 12 months through September.
The horizontal axis shows the accumulation of foreign exchange reserves as a share of GDP over the same period.
The relationship evident in the graph suggests that the economies that have most heavily intervened in foreign exchange markets have succeeded in limiting the appreciation of their currencies.
The graph also illustrates that some emerging market economies have intervened at very high levels and others relatively little.
Judging from the changes in the real effective exchange rate, the emerging market economies that have largely let market forces determine their exchange rates have seen their competitiveness reduced relative to those emerging market economies that have intervened more aggressively.
It is striking that, amid all the concerns about renewed private capital inflows to the emerging market economies, total capital, on net, is still flowing from relatively labor-abundant emerging market economies to capital-abundant advanced economies.
In particular, the current account deficit of the United States implies that it experienced net capital inflows exceeding 3 percent of GDP in the first half of this year.
A key driver of this "uphill" flow of capital is official reserve accumulation in the emerging market economies that exceeds private capital inflows to these economies.
The total holdings of foreign exchange reserves by selected major emerging market economies, shown in figure 9, have risen sharply since the crisis and now surpass $5 trillion‑‑about six times their level a decade ago.
It is instructive to contrast this situation with what would happen in an international system in which exchange rates were allowed to fully reflect market fundamentals.
In the current context, advanced economies would pursue accommodative monetary policies as needed to foster recovery and to guard against unwanted disinflation.
At the same time, emerging market economies would tighten their own monetary policies to the degree needed to prevent overheating and inflation.
The resulting increase in emerging market interest rates relative to those in the advanced economies would naturally lead to increased capital flows from advanced to emerging economies and, consequently, to currency appreciation in emerging market economies.
The net result would be more balanced and sustainable global economic growth.

Given these advantages of a system of market-determined exchange rates, why have officials in many emerging markets leaned against appreciation of their currencies toward levels more consistent with market fundamentals? The principal answer is that currency undervaluation on the part of some countries has been part of a long-term export-led strategy for growth and development.
This strategy, which allows a country's producers to operate at a greater scale and to produce a more diverse set of products than domestic demand alone might sustain, has been viewed as promoting economic growth and, more broadly, as making an important contribution to the development of a number of countries.
However, increasingly over time, the strategy of currency undervaluation has demonstrated important drawbacks, both for the world system and for the countries using that strategy.
First, as I have described, currency undervaluation inhibits necessary macroeconomic adjustments and creates challenges for policymakers in both advanced and emerging market economies.
Globally, both growth and trade are unbalanced, as reflected in the two-speed recovery and in persistent current account surpluses and deficits.
Because a strong expansion in the emerging market economies will ultimately depend on a recovery in the more advanced economies, this pattern of two-speed growth might very well be resolved in favor of slow growth for everyone if the recovery in the advanced economies falls short.
Likewise, large and persistent imbalances in current accounts represent a growing financial and economic risk.
Second, the current system leads to uneven burdens of adjustment among countries, with those countries that allow substantial flexibility in their exchange rates bearing the greatest burden (for example, in having to make potentially large and rapid adjustments in the scale of export-oriented industries) and those that resist appreciation bearing the least.
Third, countries that maintain undervalued currencies may themselves face important costs at the national level, including a reduced ability to use independent monetary policies to stabilize their economies and the risks associated with excessive or volatile capital inflows.
The latter can be managed to some extent with a variety of tools, including various forms of capital controls, but such approaches can be difficult to implement or lead to microeconomic distortions.
The high levels of reserves associated with currency undervaluation may also imply significant fiscal costs if the liabilities issued to sterilize reserves bear interest rates that exceed those on the reserve assets themselves.
Perhaps most important, the ultimate purpose of economic growth is to deliver higher living standards at home; thus, eventually, the benefits of shifting productive resources to satisfying domestic needs must outweigh the development benefits of continued reliance on export-led growth.

The current international monetary system is not working as well as it should.
Currency undervaluation by surplus countries is inhibiting needed international adjustment and creating spillover effects that would not exist if exchange rates better reflected market fundamentals.
In the longer term, significantly greater flexibility in exchange rates to reflect market forces would be desirable and achievable.
That flexibility would help facilitate global rebalancing and reduce the problems of policy spillovers that emerging market economies are confronting today.
The further liberalization of exchange rate and capital account regimes would be most effective if it were accompanied by complementary financial and structural policies to help achieve better global balance in trade and capital flows.
For example, surplus countries could speed adjustment with policies that boost domestic spending, such as strengthening the social safety net, improving retail credit markets to encourage domestic consumption, or other structural reforms.
In the United States, putting fiscal policy on a sustainable path is a critical step toward increasing national saving in the longer term.
Some of these shifts in spending and production are already occurring; for example, China is taking steps to boost domestic demand and the U.S.
In the near term, a shift of the international regime toward one in which exchange rates respond flexibly to market forces is, unfortunately, probably not practical for all economies.
Some emerging market economies do not have the infrastructure to support a fully convertible, internationally traded currency and to allow unrestricted capital flows.
Moreover, the internal rebalancing associated with exchange rate appreciation--that is, the shifting of resources and productive capacity from production for external markets to production for the domestic market--takes time.
That said, in the short term, rebalancing economic growth between the advanced and emerging market economies should remain a common objective, as a two-speed global recovery may not be sustainable.
But the rebalancing of growth would also be facilitated if fast-growing countries, especially those with large current account surpluses, would take action to reduce their surpluses, while slow-growing countries, especially those with large current account deficits, take parallel actions to reduce those deficits.
First, it would be a down payment toward global rebalancing of trade and current accounts, an essential outcome for long-run economic and financial stability.
Second, improving the trade balances of slow-growing countries would help them grow more quickly, perhaps reducing the need for accommodative policies in those countries while enhancing the sustainability of the global recovery.
Unfortunately, so long as exchange rate adjustment is incomplete and global growth prospects are markedly uneven, the problem of excessively strong capital inflows to emerging markets may persist.
As currently constituted, the international monetary system has a structural flaw: It lacks a mechanism, market based or otherwise, to induce needed adjustments by surplus countries, which can result in persistent imbalances.
For example, in the somewhat different context of the gold standard in the period prior to the Great Depression, the United States and France ran large current account surpluses, accompanied by large inflows of gold.
However, in defiance of the so-called rules of the game of the international gold standard, neither country allowed the higher gold reserves to feed through to their domestic money supplies and price levels, with the result that the real exchange rate in each country remained persistently undervalued.
These policies created deflationary pressures in deficit countries that were losing gold, which helped bring on the Great Depression.3 The gold standard was meant to ensure economic and financial stability, but failures of international coordination undermined these very goals.
Although the parallels are certainly far from perfect, and I am certainly not predicting a new Depression, some of the lessons from that grim period are applicable today.4 In particular, for large, systemically important countries with persistent current account surpluses, the pursuit of export-led growth cannot ultimately succeed if the implications of that strategy for global growth and stability are not taken into account.
Thus, it would be desirable for the global community, over time, to devise an international monetary system that more consistently aligns the interests of individual countries with the interests of the global economy as a whole.
In particular, such a system would provide more effective checks on the tendency for countries to run large and persistent external imbalances, whether surpluses or deficits.
Changes to accomplish these goals will take considerable time, effort, and coordination to implement.
In the meantime, without such a system in place, the countries of the world must recognize their collective responsibility for bringing about the rebalancing required to preserve global economic stability and prosperity.
I hope that policymakers in all countries can work together cooperatively to achieve a stronger, more sustainable, and more balanced global economy.

Total inflation measures have been volatile in recent years but are currently a bit above 1 percent on a 12-month basis.
Projections by FOMC participants have indicated that, under appropriate monetary policies, inflation as measured by the price index for personal consumption expenditures should converge to 2 percent or a bit less in the long run.
Unexpectedly high realizations of real interest rates increase the real burden of household and business debts, relative to what was anticipated when the debt contracts were signed.
Higher expected real interest rates deter capital investment and other forms of spending.
Bernanke and Harold James (1991), "The Gold Standard, Deflation, and Financial Crisis in the Great Depression: An International Comparison," in R.
Glenn Hubbard, ed., Financial Markets and Financial Crises, a National Bureau of Economic Research Project Report (Chicago: University of Chicago Press); Barry Eichengreen (1992), Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great Depression, 1919-1939 (New York: Oxford University Press); and Douglas A.
Irwin (2010), "Did France Cause the Great Depression? (293 KB PDF) " manuscript, Dartmouth College and National Bureau of Economic Research, September.
See Barry Eichengreen and Peter Temin (2010), "Fetters of Gold and Paper (177 KB PDF) ," NBER Working Paper Series 16202 (Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research, July).

I'm particularly pleased to share my thoughts with you in my first public speech since joining the Federal Reserve Board of Governors last month.
These are challenging times for policymakers because they are profoundly challenging times for millions of Americans.
I commend you for your ongoing and persistent contributions to stabilizing family and community life in our country.
As you well know--and in fact you were among the first to predict the problem--millions of homeowners have gone through foreclosure in recent years; many more will go through it in the near future; and countless others are struggling to keep their payments current even as the housing market and the overall economy make it hard to do so.
In addition, right now nearly five million loans are somewhere in the foreclosure process, or are 90 days or more past due and hence at serious risk for a foreclosure filing.
the strategic misapplication of payments so that the homeowner's payments for principal and interest due on the loan were improperly applied to the servicer's fees, sometimes improperly causing the loan to be considered to be in default; and
This simple approach ensured that lenders knew immediately if a homeowner was having payment problems, and could take action to mitigate possible losses.
A fair bit of this kind of "portfolio servicing" still takes place, but as the residential real estate market shifted from an originate-to-hold model to an originate-to-distribute model, an industry of independent third-party entities emerged to service the loans on behalf of the securitization trusts.
These servicing arrangements are now commonplace in the industry: In fact, the system has matured rapidly and experienced considerable consolidation over the past twenty years.
But the kind of time-consuming, involved work that is now needed in the loss mitigation area was not contemplated at anything like this kind of scale, and the payment structures between the servicers and investors may not always be sufficient to support large-scale loan workout activity.
Again, for routine payment processing this all leads to economies of scale, and the industry has consolidated significantly in recent years as a result.
Loan servicers likely never anticipated the drastic need for the kind of time-consuming, detailed work that is now required in the loss mitigation area, and the payment structures between the servicers and investors are not sufficient to support large-scale loan workout activity.
Why might a servicer lose money in an instance that could be win-win for the borrower and investor? It's because of the amount of work needed, the structure for reimbursing costs to the servicer, and other costs incurred by the servicer on delinquent, but not yet foreclosed upon, borrowers.
Other costs result from even temporary forbearance, such as the servicer's requirement, in most cases, to advance principal and interest to the investor every month, even though it has not received payment from the borrower.
For example, high percentages of the pre-HAMP modifications provided no payment relief to borrowers and, not surprisingly, then exhibited high re-default rates.
While there may be some specific practices--"robo-signing" among them--that are possible to isolate and eliminate, chronic, uncured problems continue to plague this industry.
Because consumers cannot choose to hire or fire their servicers (other than by paying off the loan), the industry lacks the level of market discipline imposed in other industries by the working of consumer choice.
For this reason, if servicers do not actively maintain adequate and trained staff and do not establish and heed internal controls, if investors do not monitor their servicers' behavior, if regulators do not conduct meaningful examinations, if courts do not stand guard against unfair practices, both substantive and procedural, then it will be much less likely that a well-functioning housing market will reemerge from this crisis.
Because the very structure of the loan servicing industry as it currently operates inevitably leads to misaligned incentives and a propensity to defer costly investments, a more significant re-thinking of the basic business model must also be undertaken if we are to avoid repeating prior mistakes.
Let me conclude by talking a little bit about what the Federal Reserve and others are doing to address these issues.
Although foreclosure practices have traditionally been--and rightfully should remain--a domain of the states, the Federal Reserve has been expanding its expertise in working with the industry--first, in a review of non-bank subsidiaries in conjunction with other state and federal regulators, and, currently, with a review of loan modification practices by certain servicers.
As the current servicing issues began to emerge more clearly, the Federal Reserve and other federal banking agencies initiated an in-depth review of practices at the largest mortgage servicing operations.
Preliminarily, we have directed certain firms to complete thorough self-assessments of the policies and procedures they use for determining whether to foreclose on a residential mortgage loan, and, in those cases where foreclosure is authorized, an examination of the processes they used to comply with relevant federal and state laws.
We have directed these firms not just to address their stated policies and procedures, but to assess how they actually work in practice.
At the same time, examiners from the banking agencies will be on-site to review individual loan files, evaluate controls over the selection and management of third-party service providers, and carefully test the assertions that the institutions make in their self-assessments.
Institutions will be directed to correct any deficiencies that they discover in their self-assessments or that come to light in the on-site examination process.
As a general matter, the Federal Reserve reviews the compliance procedures of the banking organizations that we supervise as part of the examination process.
However, federal examiners typically are not experts in the application of each state's laws, especially in an area as complex as mortgage foreclosure procedures.
So, federal examiners need to coordinate with their state examiner counterparts who should have a stronger understanding of their state foreclosure laws.
For federally chartered institutions, the Federal Reserve requires that the banks we supervise have adequate compliance risk management programs that are being followed.
Given the potential ramifications for consumers, the housing market, and the economy as a whole, I believe it's fair to say that every relevant arm of the federal government is taking the underlying dynamics of the mortgage foreclosure crisis very seriously.
The coordination and expertise at the state level in these matters is an essential corrective.
However, because so much is riding on getting these systems right, and because consumers have such little measure of individual choice or recourse, reliance on pledges from market participants will not be enough.
Until a better business model is developed that eliminates the business incentives that can potentially harm consumers, there will be a need for close regulatory scrutiny of these issues and for appropriate enforcement action that addresses them.

Thank you very much for your invitation to speak at this second annual symposium on financial regulatory reform.
As you know, inquiries into the extent of, and culpability for, these problems are currently being conducted by banking regulators, other federal agencies, and state attorneys general.
This simply is not a good outcome from any broad perspective--not for the revival of housing markets, not for the banks and investors that hold the delinquent mortgages, and in the longer run, not even for the homeowners themselves, who will ultimately have to move out, taking with them a dark cloud over their creditworthiness.
While some banks and other industry participants have stepped forward to increase the rate of modifications relative to foreclosures, many have not done enough.
I note that while last year's conference was called "Regulatory Reform at the Crossroads," this year's event is entitled "The Dodd-Frank Act and the Road Ahead for Financial Regulatory Reform." The metaphor of a long road ahead following key decisions in Dodd-Frank is an apt one for the Federal Reserve and other regulatory agencies that will, over the next 15 to 20 months, complete implementation of that bill through scores of regulations.
Though we may no longer face a major crossroads, the federal banking agencies will certainly encounter numerous forks in the road we are travelling.
Others will be encountered as we continue the Basel III exercise, to which I will return in a moment.
Still other choices will doubtless be required as all the member agencies of the new Financial Stability Oversight Council evaluate and, potentially, respond to developments in financial markets.
Thus, while I recognize there is enormous interest in where the Federal Reserve and other rule-writing agencies may be headed, I cannot say much about the substance of the regulations that will eventually be proposed and adopted.
What I can say is that, in implementing Dodd-Frank, the Board of Governors will be guided by the same norms of statutory construction that a court would apply.
Of course, there are a good many provisions that do not admit of a single interpretation, and the implementation of those provisions will require the exercise of discretion by the Federal Reserve or other regulatory agencies.
As to transparency: At the Federal Reserve, we are entering into the public record a summary of all communications with non-government groups or individuals regarding matters subject to a potential or proposed rulemaking under Dodd-Frank.
We are also hearing views on regulatory implementation at meetings that cover a broad range of topics, such as at our last Consumer Advisory Council session.
Although they had long used bank capital ratios as a supervisory tool, U.S.
bank regulators did not impose explicit minimum capital requirements until the 1980s.
The proximate reason for this change was regulatory concern over the decline in capital ratios of the largest banks--a concern reinforced by Congress, as it saw some of those large banks facing enormous losses on their loans to foreign sovereigns.
regulatory innovation was effectively internationalized a few years later in the original Basel Accord.
At the same time, regulators came to regard capital requirements as a supple prudential tool.
As activity and affiliation restrictions were loosened in the United States, capital requirements seemed a promising way to protect the public's interest in the stability of financial institutions that had access to the Federal Reserve's discount window and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation insurance.
Capital requirements promised to provide a buffer against bank losses from any activities in which the bank or its affiliates might engage, a consideration of equal or greater relevance in countries with universal banking models.
Some support also developed for the proposition that minimum capital levels could, by maintaining a material equity value for the bank, serve as a disincentive for excessive risk-taking by management and shareholders.
In the ensuing quarter century, the attention of banking regulators around the world had been heavily oriented toward elaborating capital requirements to reflect more precisely the particular risks faced by a financial institution.
Capital requirements had, to a considerable extent, become the dominant prudential regulatory tool.
The financial crisis showed that the concentrated, almost all-consuming regulatory focus on refining bank capital requirements in Basel II had come at the expense of attention to other risks in the financial system.
In particular, there was insufficient appreciation of the implications of the growth in size, leverage, and maturity transformation levels of the shadow banking system for the balance sheets of commercial banks and for overall financial stability.
The limitations of capital requirements as a regulatory tool, such as the frequent lag between declines in asset values and reductions in bank capital, were also confirmed by experience during the crisis.
But it was also evident that capital requirements had simply been set too low in general, and with respect to particular assets.
One of the most obvious examples was the capital requirement for asset-backed securities in the trading books of banks.
The requirement was based on returns over a 10-day holding period, used a one-year observation period that had been characterized by unusually low price volatility, and neglected the credit risks inherent in these traded instruments.
It was also apparent that at least some of the instruments that qualified as "Tier 1 capital" for regulatory purposes were not reliable buffers against losses, at least not on a going concern basis.
It is instructive that during the height of the crisis, counterparties and other market actors looked almost exclusively to the amount of tangible common equity held by financial institutions in evaluating the creditworthiness and overall stability of those institutions--they essentially ignored the Tier 1 and total risk-based capital ratios in regulatory requirements.
In the fall of 2008, there was widespread doubt in markets that the common equity of some of our largest institutions was sufficient to withstand the losses that those firms appeared to be facing.
This doubt made investors and counterparties increasingly reluctant to deal with these firms, contributing to the severe liquidity strains that characterized financial markets at the time.
It is obvious that the post-crisis regulatory system will not be as dependent on capital requirements as the pre-crisis regime.
Dodd-Frank itself is testimony to this fact, as are a number of changes already made by banking agencies.
There will be increased emphasis on market discipline, liquidity regulation, activities restrictions, and more effective supervision.
But the crisis reinforces the point that robust capital requirements should continue to be a central component of the financial regulatory system.
banking agencies, and most of our counterparts from countries represented in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, made strengthening the capital regime a high priority in the latest financial reform agenda.
Basel III makes a number of important changes to address deficiencies in the pre-crisis capital rules:
First, reflecting both intuitive good sense and market realities during the crisis, Basel III creates a new minimum common equity capital requirement.
Moreover, the agreement provides a definition of common equity that will prevent firms or national regulators from including in the calculation of common equity certain assets that could dilute its loss-absorbing character.
The conservation buffer is a new feature of capital regulation, intended specifically to reflect the losses that a firm may suffer during periods of financial stress.
Thus the concept behind the two-level requirement is that a banking organization should be able to withstand losses associated with systemic stress and still be a viable financial intermediary.
This concept is comparable to the approach we adopted during the Supervisory Capital Assessment Program (SCAP) in early 2009.
There, you may recall, we used a special stress test to provide a rough estimate of losses that the large banking organizations could face in an adverse scenario and asked that they hold capital sufficient to absorb those losses and still be above common equity levels that would maintain the firms as viable intermediaries.
In our internal analysis at the Federal Reserve in preparation for the Basel Committee deliberations, we analyzed distributions of actual losses suffered by larger institutions over the last several decades, on the assumption that an institution that could withstand such losses at a high confidence level would be regarded as a viable going concern.
For the conservation buffer, we looked at actual pre-SCAP losses incurred by large banking firms during the recent stress period and SCAP estimates of additional losses associated with the recent stress period.
In particular, government capital injections and debt guarantees in the fall of 2008 complicated the estimation of losses that might have been incurred in the absence of too-big-to-fail support.
The practical effect of the two-level approach is that banks under stress may let their common equity ratio drop below the 7% level that is the sum of the minimum and buffer requirements.
However, restrictions on capital distributions will result, which will become progressively more stringent as the common equity ratio drops closer to the 4.5% minimum.
The buffer is thus designed to forestall banks from continuing to pay dividends even as they come under stress, a practice observed in some institutions during the financial crisis.
Realistically, both regulators and markets will expect firms generally to maintain their common equity ratios above 7%.
Third, Basel III makes extensive changes to the risk weights assigned to a financial institution's traded assets and counterparty exposures.
As I mentioned earlier, the market-risk requirements of the pre-crisis capital regime were woefully inadequate.
In many instances, they simply did not reflect the actual risk assumed by an institution.
They also created an invitation to arbitrage credit risks by turning them into traded assets with lower risk weights.
It is also noteworthy that the changes in risk weights incorporate some elements of a macroprudential perspective as, for example, in higher capital requirements on equity investments in other financial firms and credit exposures to large financial firms
Fourth, Basel III provides for a minimum leverage ratio, roughly similar to requirements already applicable under national law in the United States and Canada.
While the terms of this leverage requirement have been agreed to, there will be a supervisory monitoring period and then a parallel run to assess its impact, particularly in countries with no history of such a requirement, and to provide for adjustments if warranted.
We favored a significant transition period, so as to allow firms flexibility in adjusting to the new regime through such means as running off higher risk-weighted assets, adjusting their business models gradually, or using retained earnings to add any new capital that might be required under the new rules.
However, the lengthy transition period was an important inducement for some countries to agree to the new, much stronger standards.
With the agreements reached in July and September at meetings of the Governors and Heads of Supervision (GHOS) in Basel, the structure and basic elements of Basel III are clear.
banking agencies will need to implement Basel III through domestic capital regulations.
There are things we would have done differently if we were writing a capital regulation on our own.
It does not really address some pre-crisis problems in capital regulation such as pro-cyclicality.
But it is a major step forward for capital regulation.
It will raise minimum requirements substantially, ensure that regulatory capital is truly loss absorbing, and discourage some of the risky activities for which the pre-crisis regime required far too little capital.
Basel III was also a major step forward in international cooperation.
I believe that another factor in turning things around was that, unlike at some times in the past, the U.S.
Obviously, the benefits of Basel III for financial stability will be realized only if they are implemented rigorously.
In this regard, it is important to draw a distinction between, on the one hand, implementation in the sense of enacting national regulations that incorporate the Basel standards and, on the other, implementation in the sense that firms are actually holding the amounts of capital called for by the internationally agreed rules.
The Basel Committee must be able to monitor effectively implementation of, and compliance with, these new capital standards.
A number of market analysts have noted that, even under current market risk capital rules, there is considerable apparent variation in the risk-weightings apparently applied by different banks.
We are urging the Committee to explore mechanisms for ensuring that these strengthened capital standards lead to a consistency in application, as well as in the provisions of relevant domestic regulations.
Along these lines, we have heard complaints from a few other countries that Basel II is not yet operative for our large, internationally active banking organizations in the United States.
As we have explained, despite the substantial resources devoted by both banking organizations and supervisors to the tasks of developing and validating the Advanced Internal Ratings-Based Approach in those institutions, we continue to encounter significant difficulties.
For one thing, we required significant capital increases as part of the SCAP and the Troubled Asset Relief Program repayment processes last year.
Also, we note that the required capital levels for some foreign banks adopting Basel II apparently declined from Basel I levels.
I suspect it would also result in supervisors learning from one another and thus improving the quality of large institution capital regulation globally.
Although, fortunately, Basel III does not present nearly the degree of technical challenge posed by the advanced approach of Basel II, there will still be a good bit of opaqueness in how some of its components are implemented and thus a continuing need for significant monitoring by the Basel Committee.
One piece of unfinished business on the international capital regulatory agenda arises from the agreement by the GHOS in September that systemically important financial institutions should have loss absorbing capacity beyond the Basel III requirements.
This international position parallels the Dodd-Frank requirement that the Federal Reserve apply capital requirements to large, interconnected financial institutions that are more stringent than those applied to other banks.
interests to develop our plans for implementing our domestic statutory obligation in tandem with our participation in this international process, so as to maximize the chances of convergence of international standards and our own practice.
Work on this issue in the Basel Committee and the Financial Stability Board will continue well into next year.
Before closing, I want to address requests for renewed or increased dividends by our large bank holding companies, an issue in which there has been substantial recent interest.
As the financial system has stabilized, some firms have indicated an interest in resuming or increasing dividends, or repurchasing shares.
We have been concerned with the safety and soundness implications of resuming or increasing capital distributions in the absence of a strong, forward-looking demonstration that the capital position of a firm would be protected even under stressed conditions.
Until Basel III was completed and Dodd-Frank enacted, it was obviously difficult for any firm to make that kind of demonstration, since its future capital needs and potential business model changes were obviously unknown.
While there continues to be a relatively high degree of uncertainty about near- to medium-term economic prospects, the basic questions surrounding capital and regulatory reform have now been answered.
We anticipate that some firms with high capital levels that have been retaining solid earnings for several quarters will be interested in increasing or resuming dividends.
In response to these anticipated requests, we will soon be issuing supervisory guidelines applicable to such requests from the largest holding companies for the first quarter of next year.
Although the details of these guidelines are still being finalized, I can say that our approach to considering such requests will be a conservative one.
We will expect firms to submit convincing capital plans that demonstrate their ability to absorb losses over the next two years under an adverse economic scenario that we will specify, and still remain amply capitalized.
We also expect that firms will have a sound estimate of any significant risks that may not be captured by the stress testing, such as potential mortgage putback exposures, and the capacity to absorb any consequent losses.
The firms will also be asked to show how, even with their proposed capital distributions, they will readily and comfortably meet the Basel III requirements as they come into effect, as well as to accommodate any business model changes that might be necessitated by Dodd-Frank.
A year from now we will be in the midst of a regulatory process implementing Basel III, and there will likely be an active debate over the future of the government-sponsored enterprises.
So I see little risk that the third annual conference on financial regulatory reform at George Washington Law School will be entitled "The End of the Road." Maybe, just maybe, I have given you a title for the fourth.

At the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association, New York, New York
Thank you to the Securities Industry and Financial Markets Association for inviting me to your annual meeting.1 
After a cyclical boost early this year, the current state of the U.S.
economy is unimpressive: modest growth in output, high levels of unemployment, stagnant wages, low levels of consumer and business sentiment, and volatile financial markets.
We should accept smaller improvements in output and employment and productivity over the horizon.
Instead, we should resign ourselves to the new normal now upon us, and conduct policy accordingly.
In particular, central bankers in advanced economies--against a backdrop of disinflation--should be comfortably permissive in the conduct of monetary policy, still more encouraging of still more accommodative central bank policies for still longer periods.
I consider this emerging ethos to be dangerous and defeatist and debunked by America's own exceptional economic history.
The current period of subpar growth and high unemployment is real, but it need not persist.
In my remarks, I will first venture outside the realm of monetary policy.
I do this not in the hope of expanding further the remit of the Federal Reserve.
To the contrary--I do this because of the heavy burdens being heaped upon monetary policy.
To give monetary policy a chance to be more effective, other key macroeconomic policies--fiscal, regulatory, and trade policy--cannot be working at cross-purposes.
Then, I will return to the conduct of monetary policy.
We can no longer afford to tolerate economic policies that are preoccupied with the here-and-now.
Chronic short-termism in the conduct of economic policy has done much to bring us to this parlous point.
The best of your firms most surely deliver on your promises to your stakeholders, but your strategic judgments are made with a focus on the long term.
By now, policymakers should be skeptical of the long-term benefits of temporary fixes-- one-off Band-Aids and short-cuts--to do the hard work of resurrecting the world's great economic power.
No doubt aggregate demand fell dramatically during the recession, and its weakness continues to mark the economic landscape.
These stimulus programs did little, in my view, to put the economy on a stronger, more sustainable trajectory.
Sound fiscal policy must do more than reacquaint consumers with old, bad habits.
It is a function of the quality and quantity of labor and capital assembled by our companies.
Recovery after a recession demands that capital and labor be reallocated.
If policymakers fail to give the supply side of the economy more considered attention, we will find the new normalists to be right.
Persistent weakness in the labor markets, in effect, permanently disqualifies more workers from a place in the labor force.
The natural rate of unemployment moves higher and potential GDP falls.
A strict economic diet of fiscal austerity has greater appeal, a kind of penance owed for the excesses of the past.
But root-canal economics does not constitute, in my view, optimal economic policy.
The United States would be better off with a third way: pro-growth economic policy.
But, the conduct of fiscal policy should not stop there.
The adoption of pro-growth economic policies would strengthen incentives to invest in capital and labor over the horizon.
It would place the country's economic potential at the center of the policy nexus.
Pro-growth policies would give us the best opportunity to bring unemployment rates down dramatically.
But the good news is that the United States still has the most dynamic, resilient labor force in the world, and the deepest, most liquid capital markets.
It is strong growth that can do more to increase government revenues.
It is strong growth that can most effectively defease outsized liabilities.
And it is strong growth that can pave the way for robust job creation and higher living standards.
The improved regime would reduce policy uncertainty over the life of an investment in labor or capital.
And it would provide for far more efficient capital allocation.
Pro-growth policies also demand reform in the conduct of regulatory policy.
It would provide more timely, clear, and consistent rules so that firms--financial and otherwise--could innovate in a changing economic landscape.
Adopting pro-growth trade policies would signal to the world that the United States is ready to resume its leading role on the world stage.
So, how far does the economy find itself from our aspirations? If policies could be moved in the right direction, we could close the gap between the new malaise and the new promise.
Policy need not be perfect, but it cannot be so growth-defeating.
economy is capable of much more than it is delivering.
Larger, more liquid corporate balance sheets and higher personal saving rates are the reasonable and right responses to massive government dissaving and unpredictable government policies.
It is these transitions in our market economy--and the adoption of pro-growth fiscal, regulatory, and trade policies--that lay the essential groundwork for greater, more sustainable prosperity.
The Federal Reserve is not a repair shop for broken fiscal, trade, or regulatory policies.
Given what ails us, additional monetary policy measures are, at best, poor substitutes for more powerful pro-growth policies.
The Fed can lose its hard-earned credibility--and monetary policy can lose its considerable sway--if its policies overpromise or underdeliver.
We should be leery of drawing inapt lessons from the crisis to the current policy conjuncture.
Monetary policy can surely have great influence--most notably by establishing stable prices and appropriate financial conditions--on the real economy.
But when non-traditional tools are needed to loosen policy and markets are functioning more or less normally--even with output and employment below trend--the risk-reward ratio for policy action is decidedly less favorable.
In my view, these risks increase with the size of the Federal Reserve's balance sheet.
As a result, we cannot and should not be as aggressive as conventional policy rules--cultivated in more benign environments--might judge appropriate.
Last week, my colleagues and I on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) engaged in this debate.
The FOMC announced its intent to expand the Fed's balance sheet by purchasing an additional $75 billion of long-term Treasury securities per month through the second quarter of 2011.
Policies should be altered if certain objectives are satisfied, purported benefits disappoint, or potential risks threaten to materialize.
The goals of the Federal Reserve's policies are to promote economic recovery and to help ensure price stability, consistent with our mandate.
I am less optimistic than some that additional asset purchases will have significant, durable benefits for the real economy.
Lower risk-free rates and higher equity prices--if sustained--could strengthen household and business balance sheets, and raise confidence in the strength of the economy.
Modestly higher rates of inflation could increase nominal growth, and ostensibly place the economy on a stronger trajectory.
But, expanding the Fed's balance sheet is not a free option.
If the recent weakness in the dollar, run-up in commodity prices, and other forward-looking indicators are sustained and passed along into final prices, the Fed's price stability objective might no longer be a compelling policy rationale.
In such a case--even with the unemployment rate still high--the FOMC would have cause to consider the path of policy.
And if the Fed's holdings work predominantly through the so-called portfolio balance channel, the cessation of purchases should not reverse any benefits attained.
The Fed's increased presence in the market for long-term Treasury securities also poses nontrivial risks.
It plays a unique role in the global financial system.
It is a corollary to the dollar's role as the world's reserve currency.
The prices assigned to Treasury securities--the risk-free rate--are the foundation from which the price of virtually every asset in the world is calculated.
As the Fed's balance sheet expands, it becomes more of a price maker than a price taker in the Treasury market.
And if market participants come to doubt these prices--or their reliance on these prices proves fleeting--risk premiums across asset classes and geographies could move unexpectedly.
In the United States, the Fed's expanded participation in the long-term Treasury market also runs the more subtle risk of obfuscating price signals about total U.S.
The fiscal authorities need as clear an early warning system as possible, not a handy excuse to delay.
monetary policy and distortions in the international monetary system--we see an increasing tendency by policymakers to intervene in currency markets, administer unilateral measures, institute ad hoc capital controls, and resort to protectionist policies.
Heightened tensions in currency and capital markets could result in a more protracted and difficult global recovery.
Responsible monetary policy in the current environment requires attention not only to near-term macroeconomic conditions, but also to corollary risks with long-term effects.
Monetary policy has done much to ease credit conditions and improve financial market functioning.
And it is playing an important role in setting the conditions for the real economy to prosper.
But, the Federal Reserve cannot and should not do it alone.
Other policymakers must bear their burden and do their part to encourage more-robust economic growth and establish the conditions for stronger employment.
The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Board of Governors or the Federal Open Market Committee.

At the Federal Reserve System and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation Conference on Mortgage Foreclosures and the Future of Housing, Arlington, Virginia
It's my pleasure to welcome you to this joint conference of the Federal Reserve System and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC).
Our program over the next two days will highlight policy-oriented research on U.S.
I would like to thank the many talented people throughout the Federal Reserve System and at the FDIC who have worked together to make this conference a reality.
The federal banking agencies are working together to complete an in-depth review of practices at the largest mortgage servicing operations.
In addition, Federal Reserve staff members and their counterparts at other federal agencies are evaluating the potential effects of these problems on the real estate market and financial institutions.
Any discussion of housing policy in this country must begin with some recognition of the importance Americans attach to homeownership.
Tax incentives, mortgage insurance from the Federal Housing Administration, and other government policies all contributed to a long rise in the U.S.
Now, more than 20 percent of borrowers owe more than their home is worth and an additional 33 percent have equity cushions of 10 percent or less, putting them at risk should house prices decline much further.
In response to the fallout from the financial crisis, the Fed has helped stabilize the mortgage market and improve financial conditions more broadly, thus promoting economic recovery.
As the foreclosure crisis has intensified, Federal Reserve staff in our research, community development, and supervision and regulation divisions have actively collaborated to support foreclosure prevention at the local level and promote neighborhood stabilization initiatives.
A key initiative developed under the leadership of Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago President Charles Evans has been the Mortgage Outreach and Research Effort, known as MORE.
MORE involves all 12 Federal Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors in a collaboration that pools resources and combines expertise to inform and engage policymakers, community organizations, financial institutions, and the public at large.
Our community development experts are working on the ground to promote fair and equal access to banking services and improve communities.
Further, Federal Reserve staff members are conducting empirical research on mortgage- and foreclosure-related topics, and are reaching out to industry experts as well.
Copies are available here today, and it is available online at the website of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.1 The report identifies approaches the Fed has taken to mitigate the foreclosure crisis, and I'd like to share some highlights of that work.
We have helped many of our community development partners organize day-long "mega events" that have served thousands of troubled borrowers.
departments of Labor and Treasury and with the HOPE NOW Unemployment Taskforce to help unemployed homeowners avoid losing their homes.
This collaboration led to the creation of an online tool that allows homeowners and servicers to document unemployment insurance benefits as income in order to qualify for federally sponsored mortgage modification programs.
Each Federal Reserve Bank has an online Foreclosure Resource Center with information on foreclosure-related resources, including an enhanced Foreclosure Mitigation Toolkit, which provides detailed steps and information for localities seeking to develop foreclosure prevention activities.
A number of Federal Reserve research projects also have been initiated as part of the MORE program.
Community development researchers across the Federal Reserve System launched a study in 2009 of the planning and early implementation stages of the federal Neighborhood Stabilization Program (NSP).
These interviews and other data gathered during this study provide the first nationwide examination of the effect of the NSP and served as the basis for a number of Federal Reserve System reports currently in progress.
Under the auspices of the MORE initiative, the Federal Reserve sponsored conferences such as this one, and the summit held last month on Real Estate Owned and Vacant Property Strategies for Neighborhood Stabilization.
Participants at that meeting examined the community effects of foreclosed and vacant properties with the goals of helping practitioners better understand barriers to stabilizing neighborhoods, sharing practices that show promise, and discussing regional differences.
As part of that summit, the Federal Reserve released 17 papers analyzing trends, challenges, and possible solutions for addressing foreclosures and promoting neighborhood stabilization.
We will be using these ideas and others to inform our community development efforts over the coming year.
To ensure that we have access to more detailed data on mortgage and credit markets, the Federal Reserve System has created the Risk Assessment, Data Analysis, and Research, or RADAR, data warehouse.
This new platform will help inform our monetary policy, bank supervision and regulation, and community development.
Over the next two days, I understand that you will be hearing about policy-oriented research on the U.S.
All the papers on the conference program are of direct interest to policymakers and should lead to better-informed policy.
At the Fed, we will continue to encourage further research, participate in discussions, and coordinate work among groups striving for sustainable homeownership and the recovery of housing markets.
See Federal Reserve System, Mortgage Outreach and Research Efforts (MORE) Initiative (2010), Addressing the Impact of the Foreclosure Crisis: Federal Reserve Mortgage Outreach and Research Efforts (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago).

In particular, because the outlook for interest rates and the economy was so important to my bank and my customers, I spent considerable effort trying to understand the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC), the Fed's primary monetary policymaking body, and trying to anticipate the decisions coming out of individual FOMC meetings.
In fact, the first bank investment class I ever took included instruction on how to use the weekly reports of monetary aggregates to decipher Fed actions.
That will give you some idea of how long ago that was: It was before the Committee began expressing its objective in terms of the federal funds rate--actually before the Committee began saying much at all.
Now, after two years of participating in the decisionmaking process, I would like to share some observations that I believe might help you better understand the formulation of monetary policy.
Before I joined the Board, I was advised to read two speeches, "Come with Me to the FOMC" given by Governor Laurence Meyer in 1998, and an updated version presented by Governor Mark Olson in 2004.1 It turns out that Governor Meyer's speech was inspired by one given in 1967 by Edward Wayne, the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond.
In some ways there has been little change since the first edition of the "Come with Me" speech was given more than four decades ago: Members of the Board of Governors and presidents of the 12 Reserve Banks still meet regularly in Washington, D.C., to discuss how best to set monetary policy to foster full employment and stable prices.
But the ways in which these policymakers think and talk about the economic outlook, the formulation of monetary policy, and the communication of that policy have all changed dramatically, especially lately.
Members of the Board of Governors sit to his left, beginning with the Vice Chair and then continuing in order of seniority.
On the Chairman's right is the deputy secretary of the Committee, next to whom sits the president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The other Reserve Bank presidents are arrayed around the ends of the table, and staff who will be presenting sit on the side of the table opposite the Chairman.
But you won't be able to tell the difference between voters and nonvoters in any of the discussions because everyone participates equally in the meeting until the vote is taken.
After the Chairman calls the meeting to order, the manager of the System Open Market Account (SOMA) describes developments in the financial markets since the last meeting.
The SOMA, which is managed by the New York Fed, is the Federal Reserve's portfolio of securities used to implement monetary policy.
In many two-day meetings, the manager's report is followed by the discussion of a special topic, such as inflation measurements or the use of unconventional monetary policy tools.
The director of the Division of Research and Statistics and the director of the Division of International Finance at the Board give a tag-team presentation on the status and outlook for the domestic and international economies.
In the four meetings a year when we make formal economic projections, there also is a presentation that summarizes the projections of the FOMC participants and how they have changed since the previous projections.
Following a question-and-answer period, it is time for each FOMC participant to give his or her input on the economy in what is referred to as the "economic go-round."
The speaking order of FOMC participants changes a bit each time, but generally the Reserve Bank presidents go first, followed by the members of the Board.
Everyone talks about his or her views on current and expected national and international economic conditions.
Chairman Bernanke concludes the economic go-round with a summary of what all the other policymakers said about the economy, then makes his own comments.
The director of the Board's Division of Monetary Affairs then kicks off the policy discussion with a presentation of monetary policy alternatives.
For each alternative, he talks us through the rationale for choosing it and the anticipated financial market response if the action were taken.
Chairman William McChesney Martin generally spoke at the end of the single go-round, which included both the economic outlook and policy.
According to Governors Meyer and Olson, Chairman Greenspan did not speak during the economic go-round but would begin the policy go-round with his views about what the policy decision should be.
As I said, Chairman Bernanke speaks at the end of the economic go-round.
Then in the policy go-round, he usually waits until everyone else has stated their views before he shares his own opinion and suggests a path forward.
I came out of my first FOMC meeting--which began just half an hour after I was sworn in at the Fed--pumped full of adrenaline but also exhausted from the intense level of my concentration as I tried to follow everyone's comments.
Most importantly, I came out with an understanding that the meeting itself was just the tip of the iceberg, the culmination of thousands of hours of work and thought leading to a single policy statement, a process that would be repeated for each FOMC meeting.
Even after two years on the Committee, I still leave feeling impressed by the level of preparation for, and the focus and intensity at, these meetings.
Each FOMC participant has his or her own approach to the process.
First, how is the economy likely to evolve in the near and medium term?
Second, given the economic outlook, what is the appropriate policy response?
While the outlook for the economy and the appropriate instrument selection and calibration for policy are fairly obvious parts of the monetary policy decisions, I believe that communication of that policy is equally important.
First Question: How is the Economy Likely to Evolve in the Near and Medium Term?
Any discussion of monetary policy has to begin with an assessment of current economic conditions and the outlook.
People often assume that we have secret economic data that no one else gets.
We also have a number of powerful economic models that have been developed and tested over the years.
In addition to the economists and researchers at the Board, every Reserve Bank has economic research groups.
We also have financial market experts at the New York Fed and at the Board.
Given my background in banking and the important role lending has played in both the crisis and the recovery, I try to provide the Committee with insight into current lending conditions, including loan quality and credit availability.
I begin my preparations about two weeks before the meeting by contacting a number of bankers from banks of different sizes, geographic market coverage, and business models.
Then I meet with a staff group drawn from all the disciplines at the Board who bring data from surveys, supervisory observations, and their own research to help me round out the anecdotal information.
About a week ahead of the meeting, the process really ramps up as the staff distributes its analysis of the economy and participants begin to formulate their own forecasts.
On the Tuesday before the meeting, the staff distributes to the Board members and Reserve Bank presidents for comment a document with a range of options (usually three) for the statement that will be released after the meeting.
On Wednesday, the staff circulates a discussion of economic developments since the last meeting and a forecast of economic performance, including hundreds of charts, tables, and graphs.2 In addition to the baseline forecast, which is the staff's estimate of the most likely path for the economy, several alternative simulations are included to provide a sense of the impact of other plausible developments, such as faster or slower recovery or a change in inflation expectations, that were not included in the baseline forecast.
I find it impossible to form a preference for a policy to improve the path of economic performance without forming some opinion about what the performance would be absent any policy action.
So I suppose you could say that I formulate an implicit economic forecast for every meeting.
But four times a year, I submit an explicit forecast to be used along with the forecasts of other participants in the Summary of Economic Projections (SEP) that is later published with the minutes for that meeting.
Second Question: Given the Economic Outlook, What is the Appropriate Policy Response?
It contains a number of estimates of the "Equilibrium Real Federal Funds Rate"--the interest rate that if maintained would return the economy over time to its so-called potential, the highest level of output that does not lead to undue inflationary pressures.
The book also includes calculations of policy solutions using policy rules as well as model-based estimates of optimal policy.
And it contains an analysis of each of the policy alternatives that were circulated in draft form on Tuesday.
As you can imagine, in recent years the memos have covered topics such as use of large-scale asset purchases, ways the Federal Reserve might exit from nonstandard programs when the time comes, or financial stability indicators.
As we contemplate the possible need for additional monetary accommodation and the tools we have remaining, staff memos are quite helpful in assessing the potential costs and benefits of various approaches.
With our target for the federal funds rate close to zero, the policy decisions are all the more complicated.
Communication is often described as one of the tools of monetary policy.
Still, the information in participants' speeches and testimony is useful because it offers the public insights into the current discussion under way within the Committee and where individuals tend to fall in the debate.
In recent months, as interest in our policies has risen in light of the continued slow recovery, some Fed watchers and reporters have worked especially hard to piece together individual opinions to try to characterize FOMC meeting discussions and the likely outcome of our future deliberations.
While this is a legitimate and resourceful way to understand the current state of play in monetary policy, I would caution against reading too much into any individual speech, news story, or public appearance.
Instead, I would draw your attention to the official communications that are actually approved by an FOMC vote: the post-meeting statement, the minutes that are published three weeks after each meeting, and the economic forecasts that accompany the minutes each quarter.
I would focus as well on the Chairman's speeches and testimony, both because he leads the Committee and because he has the best sense of the current consensus on the Committee.
To understand policy, it is important to understand policymakers' views of the economy.
Starting about 30 years ago, though, bank presidents and Board members began submitting twice-a-year economic forecasts for a year or two ahead that were published and available to the public.
The change had two important dimensions: The projections window was extended to three years, and the frequency of projections was doubled from two times a year to four times a year.
Because of the press coverage that the quarterly economic projections often garner, it is likely that most observers are somewhat familiar with this development.
Anyone who reads the newspaper has probably read some report based on the statement the FOMC releases after each meeting.3 Reporters, investors, and others track changes to the statements word-by-word.
Instead, market participants would closely watch the actions of the New York Fed's trading desk and would then infer when policy changes were made.
On February 4, 1994, Chairman Greenspan released the first post-meeting statement describing an FOMC policy action.
A year later, the Committee indicated that a statement would be made after each FOMC policy change and by January 2000, the Committee decided to make a statement after each meeting, regardless of whether a policy change was made.
I'd note that these early statements were not completely transparent; for example, the statements used code such as "the degree of pressure on reserve positions" to indicate a change in the interest rate target.
Not until the middle of 1995 did the statements directly state the target for the federal funds rate.
Starting in late 2000, for instance, recognizing the public focus on word changes, the Committee began looking at versions of the statements that tracked the changes in wording from the prior statement.
In early 2004, the staff began providing a full set of draft policy statements, one associated with each of the policy choices, in the pre-meeting information package distributed on Thursday.
Initially, the Committee discussed the statement wording only after the policy vote was taken.
But by March 2001, the full statement was actually discussed before voting on the policy itself.
Then in October 2007, the FOMC formally recognized the value of the post-meeting statement by changing procedures to reflect that the policy vote officially encompassed the full statement, not just the policy action.
This spelled out what was already understood: What was said about a policy action was almost as important as the action itself because it helped explain what the Committee was doing and set up expectations for what it might do down the road.
Rather, my colleagues and I begin thinking about our communication almost at the same time we start thinking about the policy decision itself, and we usually debate language as a way to nuance policy.
The policy go-round has actually become the policy/communications go-round, with frequent, lively debates about everything from changing entire paragraphs in the statement to changing clauses, individual words, and sometimes even punctuation.
Using new tools to manage policy as we have in the last two years does create particular challenges in communicating our actions, intentions, and reasoning to the public.
For example, the announcement of a target for the federal funds rate combined with a phrase such as "extended period" gives the market a sense of current policy and the policy expectations for the future.
Over time, market participants have learned how to translate that sort of statement into expectations for market and economic conditions.
When we began large-scale purchases of mortgage-backed securities and agency debt, however, that decision was much more difficult to interpret.
So we communicated that we expected to purchase x amount of securities over y amount of time.
If you are interested in the debate, though, the best place to look for information on the topics discussed and views presented in FOMC meetings is in the minutes.4 Although the minutes have always been of interest to market participants, for a long time, the minutes of a meeting were not released until after the next FOMC meeting had occurred.
This expedited timing enabled market participants to gain insight into the Committee's previous decision as well as participants' views on important issues before the next FOMC meeting.5 The minutes are not just a longer, more detailed version of the statement.
Yet, I have seen numerous reports recently about the different views expressed by various FOMC participants, emphasizing the perceived level of discord.
The actions we take are intended to have specific effects on the structure of interest rates and the economy.
A shift in monetary policy or, as importantly, a shift in the expectations for monetary policy can have a huge impact on financial markets and the economy.
For this reason, I think it is critically important that we use our official communication to be as clear as we can possibly be about our assessments of economic conditions, our policy decisions and intentions, our targets, and our implementation strategies for nonstandard monetary policy tools.
I urge you to pay close attention to our official communications, and I pledge to you that we will continue to strive to communicate as clearly as possible.
I would like to close with a quote from the original "Come with Me to the FOMC" speech by Edward Wayne: "This is your central bank.

Olson (2004), "The Federal Open Market Committee and the Formation of Monetary Policy," speech delivered at the 26th Conference of the American Council on Gift Annuities, Orlando, Florida, May 5.
Luecke (2005), "Background on FOMC Meeting Minutes," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol.


I applaud Junior Achievement's mission, which is to inspire and prepare young people to succeed in a global economy and cultivate their understanding of the principles of market-based economics and entrepreneurship.

It is the 15th such facility in the United States and will serve 14,000 students annually.
As states and school districts around the country continue to integrate personal finance instruction into their curricula, organizations like Junior Achievement can provide important services to both students and teachers.

At the Revisiting Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, Boston, Massachusetts
The topic of this conference--the formulation and conduct of monetary policy in a low-inflation environment--is timely indeed.
From the late 1960s until a decade or so ago, bringing inflation under control was viewed as the greatest challenge facing central banks around the world.
Through the application of improved policy frameworks, involving both greater transparency and increased independence from short-term political influences, as well as through continued focus and persistence, central banks have largely achieved that goal.
In turn, the progress against inflation increased the stability and predictability of the economic environment and thus contributed significantly to improvements in economic performance, not least in many emerging market nations that in previous eras had suffered bouts of very high inflation.
Moreover, success greatly enhanced the credibility of central banks' commitment to price stability, and that credibility further supported stability and confidence.
Although the attainment of price stability after a period of higher inflation was a landmark achievement, monetary policymaking in an era of low inflation has not proved to be entirely straightforward.
During those years, the key questions related to tactics: How quickly should inflation be reduced? Should the central bank be proactive or "opportunistic" in reducing inflation? As average inflation levels declined, however, the issues became more complex.
The statement of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) following its May 2003 meeting was something of a watershed, in that it noted that, in the Committee's view, further disinflation would be "unwelcome." In other words, the risks to price stability had become two-sided: With inflation close to levels consistent with price stability, central banks, for the first time in many decades, had to take seriously the possibility that inflation can be too low as well as too high.
A second complication for policymaking created by low inflation arises from the fact that low inflation generally implies low nominal interest rates, which increase the potential relevance for policymaking of the zero lower bound on interest rates.
Because the short-term policy interest rate cannot be reduced below zero, the Federal Reserve and central banks in other countries have employed nonstandard policies and approaches that do not rely on reductions in the short-term interest rate.
In the remainder of my remarks I will discuss these issues in the context of current economic and policy developments.
I will comment on the near-term outlook for economic activity and inflation.
I will then compare that outlook to some quantitative measures of the Federal Reserve's objectives, namely, the longer-run outcomes that FOMC participants judge to be most consistent with its dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability.
Finally, I will observe that, in a world in which the policy interest rate is close to zero, the Committee must consider the costs and risks associated with the use of nonconventional tools when it assesses whether additional policy accommodation is likely to be beneficial on net.
The arbiters across the river in Cambridge, the business cycle dating committee of the National Bureau of Economic Research, recently made their determination: An economic recovery began in the United States in July 2009, following a series of forceful actions by central banks and other policymakers around the world that helped stabilize the financial system and restore more-normal functioning to key financial markets.
The initial upturn in activity, which was reasonably strong, reflected a number of factors, including efforts by firms to better align their inventories with their sales, expansionary monetary and fiscal policies, improved financial conditions, and a pickup in export growth.
However, factors such as fiscal policy and the inventory cycle can provide only a temporary impetus to recovery.
Sustained expansion must ultimately be driven by growth in private final demand, including consumer spending, business and residential investment, and net exports.
However, with growth in private final demand having so far proved relatively modest, overall economic growth has been proceeding at a pace that is less vigorous than we would like.
In particular, consumer spending has been inhibited by the painfully slow recovery in the labor market, which has restrained growth in wage income and has raised uncertainty about job security and employment prospects.
Since June, private-sector employers have added, on net, an average of only about 85,000 workers per month--not enough to bring the unemployment rate down significantly.
Saving rates are up noticeably from pre-crisis levels, and household assets have risen, on net, over recent quarters, while debt and debt service payments have declined markedly relative to income.1 Together with expected further easing in credit terms and conditions offered by lenders, stronger balance sheets should eventually provide households the confidence and the wherewithal to increase their pace of spending.
That said, progress has been and is likely to be uneven, as the process of balance sheet repair remains impeded to some extent by elevated unemployment, lower home values, and limited ability to refinance existing mortgages.
Household finances and attitudes also have an important influence on the housing market, which has remained depressed, notwithstanding reduced house prices and record-low mortgage rates.
In the business sector, indicators such as new orders and business sentiment suggest that growth in spending on equipment and software has slowed relative to its rapid pace earlier this year.
The availability of credit to finance investment and expand business operations remains quite uneven: Generally speaking, large firms in good financial condition can obtain credit in capital markets easily and on favorable terms.
Larger firms also hold considerable amounts of cash on their balance sheets.
By contrast, surveys and anecdotes indicate that bank-dependent smaller firms continue to face significantly greater problems in obtaining credit, reflecting in part weaker balance sheets and income prospects that limit their ability to qualify for loans as well as tight lending standards and terms on the part of banks.
The Federal Reserve and other banking regulators have been making significant efforts to improve the credit environment for small businesses, and we have seen some positive signs.
In particular, banks are no longer tightening lending standards and terms and are reportedly becoming more proactive in seeking out creditworthy borrowers.
Although the pace of recovery has slowed in recent months and is likely to continue to be fairly modest in the near term, the preconditions for a pickup in growth next year remain in place.
Stronger household finances, a further easing of credit conditions, and pent-up demand for consumer durable goods should all contribute to a somewhat faster pace of household spending.
Similarly, business investment in equipment and software should grow at a reasonably rapid pace next year, driven by rising sales, an ongoing need to replace obsolete or worn-out equipment, strong corporate balance sheets, and low financing costs.
The contribution of federal fiscal stimulus to overall growth is expected to decline steadily over coming quarters but not so quickly as to derail the recovery.
Continued solid expansion among the economies of our trading partners should also help to support foreign sales and growth in the United States.
Although output growth should be somewhat stronger in 2011 than it has been recently, growth next year seems unlikely to be much above its longer-term trend.
If so, then net job creation may not exceed by much the increase in the size of the labor force, implying that the unemployment rate will decline only slowly.
That prospect is of central concern to economic policymakers, because high rates of unemployment--especially longer-term unemployment--impose a very heavy burden on the unemployed and their families.
More broadly, prolonged high unemployment would pose a risk to consumer spending and hence to the sustainability of the recovery.
Generally speaking, measures of underlying inflation have been trending downward.
For example, so-called core PCE price inflation (which is based on the broad-based price index for personal consumption expenditures and excludes the volatile food and energy components of the overall index) has declined from approximately 2.5 percent at an annual rate in the early stages of the recession to an annual rate of about 1.1 percent over the first eight months of this year.
The overall PCE price inflation rate, which includes food and energy prices, has been highly volatile in the past few years, in large part because of sharp fluctuations in oil prices.
However, so far this year the overall inflation rate has been about the same as the core inflation rate.
The decline in underlying inflation importantly reflects the extent to which cost pressures have been restrained by substantial slack in the utilization of productive resources.
Notably, the unemployment rate remains fairly close to last fall's peak and is currently about 5 percentage points above the rates that prevailed just before the onset of the financial crisis.
For example, the continuing high level of permanent job losers may be a sign that structural impediments--such as barriers to worker mobility or mismatches between the skills that workers have and the ones that employers require--are hindering unemployed individuals from finding new jobs.
The recent behavior of unemployment and job vacancies--somewhat more vacancies are reported than would usually be the case given the number of people looking for work--is also suggestive of some increase in the level of structural unemployment.
Moreover, previous post-World-War-II recessions do not seem to have resulted in higher structural unemployment, which many economists attribute to the relative flexibility of the U.S.
Overall, my assessment is that the bulk of the increase in unemployment since the recession began is attributable to the sharp contraction in economic activity that occurred in the wake of the financial crisis and the continuing shortfall of aggregate demand since then, rather than to structural factors.3 
The public's expectations for inflation also importantly influence inflation dynamics.
Indicators of longer-term inflation expectations have generally been stable in the wake of the financial crisis.
For example, in the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia's Survey of Professional Forecasters, the median projection for the annual average inflation rate for personal consumption expenditures over the next 10 years has remained close to 2 percent.
Surveys of households likewise show that longer-term inflation expectations have been relatively stable.
In the financial markets, measures of inflation compensation at longer horizons (computed from the spread between yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities) have moved down, on net, this year but remain within their historical ranges.
With long-run inflation expectations stable and with substantial resource slack continuing to restrain cost pressures, it seems likely that inflation trends will remain subdued for some time.
To evaluate policy alternatives and explain policy choices to the public, it is essential not only to forecast the economy, but to compare that forecast to the objectives of policy.
Clear communication about the longer-run objectives of monetary policy is beneficial at all times but is particularly important in a time of low inflation and uncertain economic prospects such as the present.
Improving the public's understanding of the central bank's policy strategy reduces economic and financial uncertainty and helps households and firms make more-informed decisions.
Moreover, clarity about goals and strategies can help anchor the public's longer-term inflation expectations more firmly and thereby bolsters the central bank's ability to respond forcefully to adverse shocks.4 
The Federal Reserve has a statutory mandate to foster maximum employment and price stability, and explaining how we are working toward those goals plays a crucial role in our monetary policy strategy.
It is evident that neither of our dual objectives can be taken in isolation: On the one hand, a central bank that aimed to achieve the highest possible level of employment in the short run, without regard to other considerations, might well generate unacceptable levels of inflation without any permanent benefits in terms of employment.
On the other hand, a single-minded focus by the central bank on price stability, with no attention at all to other factors, could lead to more frequent and deeper slumps in economic activity and employment with little benefit in terms of long-run inflation performance.
Recognizing the interactions between the two parts of our mandate, the FOMC has found it useful to frame our dual mandate in terms of the longer-run sustainable rate of unemployment and the mandate-consistent inflation rate.
The longer-run sustainable rate of unemployment is the rate of unemployment that the economy can maintain without generating upward or downward pressure on inflation.
Because a healthy economy must allow for the destruction and creation of jobs, as well as for movements of workers between jobs and in and out of the labor force, the longer-run sustainable rate of unemployment is greater than zero.
Similarly, the mandate-consistent inflation rate--the inflation rate that best promotes our dual objectives in the long run--is not necessarily zero; indeed, Committee participants have generally judged that a modestly positive inflation rate over the longer run is most consistent with the dual mandate.
(The view that policy should aim for an inflation rate modestly above zero is shared by virtually all central banks around the world.) Several rationales can be provided for this judgment, including upward biases in the measurement of inflation.
A rationale that is particularly relevant today is that maintaining an "inflation buffer" (that is, an average inflation rate greater than zero) allows for a somewhat higher average level of nominal interest rates, which in turn gives the Federal Reserve greater latitude to reduce the target federal funds rate when needed to stimulate increased economic activity and employment.
A modestly positive inflation rate also reduces the probability that the economy could fall into deflation, which under some circumstances can lead to significant economic problems.
Although attaining the long-run sustainable rate of unemployment and achieving the mandate-consistent rate of inflation are both key objectives of monetary policy, the two objectives are somewhat different in nature.
Most importantly, whereas monetary policymakers clearly have the ability to determine the inflation rate in the long run, they have little or no control over the longer-run sustainable unemployment rate, which is primarily determined by demographic and structural factors, not by monetary policy.
Thus, while central bankers can choose the value of inflation they wish to target, the sustainable unemployment rate can only be estimated, and is subject to substantial uncertainty.
Moreover, the sustainable rate of unemployment typically evolves over time as its fundamental determinants change, whereas keeping inflation expectations firmly anchored generally implies that the inflation objective should remain constant unless there are compelling technical reasons for changing it, such as changes in the methods used to measure inflation.
In recent years, the Federal Reserve has taken important steps to more clearly communicate its outlook and longer-run objectives.
Since the fall of 2007, the Federal Reserve has been publishing the "Summary of Economic Projections" (SEP) four times a year in conjunction with the FOMC minutes.
The SEP provides summary statistics and an accompanying narrative regarding the projections of FOMC participants--that is, the Board members and the Reserve Bank presidents--for the growth rate of real gross domestic product (GDP), the unemployment rate, core inflation, and headline inflation over the next several calendar years.
Since early 2009, the SEP has also included information about FOMC participants' longer-run projections for the rates of economic growth, unemployment, and inflation to which the economy is expected to converge over time, in the absence of further shocks and under appropriate monetary policy.
Because appropriate monetary policy, by definition, is aimed at achieving the Federal Reserve's objectives in the longer run, FOMC participants' longer-run projections for economic growth, unemployment, and inflation may be interpreted, respectively, as estimates of the economy's longer-run potential growth rate, the longer-run sustainable rate of unemployment, and the mandate-consistent rate of inflation.
The longer-run inflation projections in the SEP indicate that FOMC participants generally judge the mandate-consistent inflation rate to be about 2 percent or a bit below.
In contrast, as I noted earlier, recent readings on underlying inflation have been approximately 1 percent.
Thus, in effect, inflation is running at rates that are too low relative to the levels that the Committee judges to be most consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate in the longer run.
In particular, at current rates of inflation, the constraint imposed by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates is too tight (the short-term real interest rate is too high, given the state of the economy), and the risk of deflation is higher than desirable.
Given that monetary policy works with a lag, the more relevant question is whether this situation is forecast to continue.
In light of the recent decline in inflation, the degree of slack in the economy, and the relative stability of inflation expectations, it is reasonable to forecast that underlying inflation--setting aside the inevitable short-run volatility--will be less than the mandate-consistent inflation rate for some time.
Of course, forecasts of inflation, as of other key economic variables, are uncertain and must be regularly updated with the arrival of new information.
As of June, the longer-run unemployment projections in the SEP had a central tendency of about 5 to 5-1/4 percent--about 1/4 percentage point higher than a year earlier--and a couple of participants' projections were even higher at around 6 to 6‑1/4 percent.
The evolution of these projections and the diversity of views reflect the characteristics that I noted earlier: The sustainable rate of unemployment may vary over time, and estimates of its value are subject to considerable uncertainty.
Nonetheless, with an actual unemployment rate of nearly 10 percent, unemployment is clearly too high relative to estimates of its sustainable rate.
Moreover, with output growth over the next year expected to be only modestly above its longer-term trend, high unemployment is currently forecast to persist for some time.
However, as I indicated earlier, one of the implications of a low-inflation environment is that policy is more likely to be constrained by the fact that nominal interest rates cannot be reduced below zero.
Indeed, the Federal Reserve reduced its target for the federal funds rate to a range of 0 to 25 basis points almost two years ago, in December 2008.
Further policy accommodation is certainly possible even with the overnight interest rate at zero, but nonconventional policies have costs and limitations that must be taken into account in judging whether and how aggressively they should be used.
For example, a means of providing additional monetary stimulus, if warranted, would be to expand the Federal Reserve's holdings of longer-term securities.5 Empirical evidence suggests that our previous program of securities purchases was successful in bringing down longer-term interest rates and thereby supporting the economic recovery.6 A similar program conducted by the Bank of England also appears to have had benefits.
However, possible costs must be weighed against the potential benefits of nonconventional policies.
One disadvantage of asset purchases relative to conventional monetary policy is that we have much less experience in judging the economic effects of this policy instrument, which makes it challenging to determine the appropriate quantity and pace of purchases and to communicate this policy response to the public.
Another concern associated with additional securities purchases is that substantial further expansion of the balance sheet could reduce public confidence in the Fed's ability to execute a smooth exit from its accommodative policies at the appropriate time.
Even if unjustified, such a reduction in confidence might lead to an undesired increase in inflation expectations, to a level above the Committee's inflation objective.
To address such concerns and to ensure that it can withdraw monetary accommodation smoothly at the appropriate time, the Federal Reserve has developed an array of new tools.7 With these tools in hand, I am confident that the FOMC will be able to tighten monetary conditions when warranted, even if the balance sheet remains considerably larger than normal at that time.
Central bank communication provides additional means of increasing the degree of policy accommodation when short-term nominal interest rates are near zero.
For example, FOMC postmeeting statements have included forward policy guidance since December 2008, and the most recent statements have reflected the FOMC's anticipation that exceptionally low levels of the federal funds rate are likely to be warranted "for an extended period," contingent on economic conditions.
A step the Committee could consider, if conditions called for it, would be to modify the language of the statement in some way that indicates that the Committee expects to keep the target for the federal funds rate low for longer than markets expect.
Such a change would presumably lower longer-term rates by an amount related to the revision in policy expectations.
A potential drawback of using the FOMC's statement in this way is that, at least without a more comprehensive framework in place, it may be difficult to convey the Committee's policy intentions with sufficient precision and conditionality.
The Committee will continue to actively review its communications strategy with the goal of providing as much clarity as possible about its outlook, policy objectives, and policy strategies.
In short, there are clearly many challenges in communicating and conducting monetary policy in a low-inflation environment, including the uncertainties associated with the use of nonconventional policy tools.
Despite these challenges, the Federal Reserve remains committed to pursuing policies that promote our dual objectives of maximum employment and price stability.
In particular, the FOMC is prepared to provide additional accommodation if needed to support the economic recovery and to return inflation over time to levels consistent with our mandate.
Of course, in considering possible further actions, the FOMC will take account of the potential costs and risks of nonconventional policies, and, as always, the Committee's actions are contingent on incoming information about the economic outlook and financial conditions.
"What Drives Movements in the Unemployment Rate? A Decomposition of the Beveridge Curve," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2010-48.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14.
"The Economic Outlook and Monetary Policy," speech delivered at "Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26-28.
"Monetary Policy Report to the Congress," statement before the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, U.S.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.
Olivei, eds., Understanding Inflation and the Implications for Monetary Policy: A Phillips Curve Retrospective.
"The Great Recession and Structural Unemployment (1.3 MB PDF) ," in International Monetary Fund Country Report, 10-248.
"A Multivariate Estimate of Trends and Cycles," unpublished paper, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Division of Research and Statistics, May.
"Economic Effects of the Unemployment Insurance Benefit (196 KB PDF) ." Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia, Business Review.
"Large-Scale Asset Purchases by the Federal Reserve: Did They Work? " Staff Report No.
"The Effectiveness of Alternative Monetary Policy Tools in a Zero Lower Bound Environment (615 KB PDF) ," working paper.
"Extended Unemployment and UI Benefits ," Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, FRBSF Economic Letter, 2010-10, April 19.
"Has the Beveridge Curve Shifted? " Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Economic Trends, August 10.
 Trimmed-mean and median CPI measures are published regularly by the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland; these indicators are constructed using the distribution of monthly price changes for the disaggregated components of the CPI.
The median CPI inflation rate is the price change at the center of this distribution, and the trimmed-mean CPI inflation rate is a weighted average of all components excluding the most extreme price increases and decreases.
 Recent empirical studies assessing the magnitude of shifts in the sustainable rate of unemployment--the portion of unemployment not attributable to temporary cyclical factors--include Barnichon and Figura (2010), Dickens (2009), Dowling, Estevão, and Tsounta (2010), Fleischman and Roberts (2010), Fujita (2010), Lindner and Tasci (2010), and Kuang and Valletta (2010).
 For further discussion of unconventional policy tools, see Bernanke (2010a).

I should stress that my remarks represent my own views and not necessarily those of my Federal Reserve colleagues.
Today I would like to cover a subject that is of surpassing importance for economic policy: the implications of financial market excesses for the supervision of the financial system, and beyond that, for the formulation of monetary policy.
Just two years ago, we lived through an almost unimaginable catastrophe--the near collapse of a global financial system that many economists had come to believe was impervious to the sort of panic that could bring on a worldwide recession.
The prevailing view was that modern economic policymaking, and central banking in particular, had mastered the management of the business cycle, and that the application of modern risk-management tools had greatly increased the stability of the financial system.
But they were viewed as self-correcting systems that tended to return to a stable equilibrium before they could inflict widespread damage on the real economy.
These events should have convinced any doubters that our financial system is vulnerable to the kinds of catastrophic breakdowns that can wreck the overall economy.
An inescapable conclusion is that a first-order priority must be to engineer a stronger, more robust system of financial regulation and supervision--one capable of identifying and managing excesses before they lead to crises.
It is now clear that our system of regulation and supervision was fatally flawed.
Despite volumes of research on financial market metrics and weighty position papers on financial stability, the fact is that we simply didn't understand some of the most dangerous systemic threats.
Looking back, I believe the regulatory community was lulled into complacency by a combination of a Panglossian worldview and benign experience.
The notion that financial markets should be as free as possible from regulatory fetters had evolved into the conviction that those markets could, to a very considerable extent, police themselves.
Over a period of decades, the financial system was tested repeatedly--the Latin American debt crisis, the savings and loan crisis, the Asian crisis, the failure of Long-Term Capital Management, and the stock market crashes of the late 1980s and early 2000s.
Despite these financial market ups and downs, economies in the United States and other parts of the world performed very well.
We were left with the mirage of a system that we thought was invulnerable to shock, a financial Maginot Line that we believed couldn't be breached.
The Great Moderation saw a progressive growth of credit and extension of risk, which came to a head in the mortgage market.
Credit flowed freely and cheaply, and households and financial institutions alike took on greater risk, borrowing to the hilt.
When housing prices plunged, the value of real-estate-related assets on the balance sheets of financial institutions, both in the traditional and shadow banking sectors, collapsed.
Not only were many of those institutions highly leveraged, they had also relied heavily on short-term borrowing to acquire those assets.
The result was panic and market breakdowns on an unimaginable scale, bringing us frighteningly close to a meltdown of the global financial system and a second Great Depression.
Governments and central banks around the world took extraordinary action to prevent complete collapse.
And the recovery has been agonizingly slow, held back, in part, by the ongoing efforts of overleveraged households and financial institutions to repair their balance sheets.
These events demonstrate both the natural tendency of the financial system to cycle through booms and busts and the potential, absent adequate supervision and regulation, for breakdowns in the financial system to threaten the global economy.
Financial market participants can be bipolar--prone to fads, manias, myopia, panics, and depression; driven by short-term gain; and easily caught up in the madness of crowds.
Methods of modern risk management may have intensified the cycle because of their reliance on metrics such as value at risk that are highly sensitive to recent performance, especially volatility.
In good times, volatility declined, and value at risk along with it.
This pattern generated a pro-cyclical willingness to take on risk and leverage, amplifying and propagating the boom and bust cycle.
The vicious cycle of a collapse of confidence, asset fire sales, evaporation of liquidity, and a deleveraging free fall was the mirror image of the manic mortgage market that preceded it.
It requires regulators to contain risks to the financial system before they erupt into crises.
Within this structure, the Federal Reserve will play an important role.
We will supervise all systemically important institutions and, jointly with other regulators in the new Financial Stability Oversight Council, establish stricter prudential standards for such firms.
We will help ensure the safety of financial market utilities that are critical to our payment, clearing, and settlement systems.
We must remain prudent, while avoiding an overly strict approach that unduly impedes financial intermediation and stifles capital formation.
Vigilance to threats of systemic financial risk must also inform the conduct of monetary policy.
We have seen that the eruption of a financial crisis can have severe economic consequences, compromising the ability of a central bank to attain its primary macroeconomic objectives.
Monetary policymakers should also be aware that the decisions they make in pursuit of price stability and full employment could, in some circumstances, affect the development of systemic risk.
For example, if compensation incentives in the financial sector are misaligned, low interest rates might heighten the ability and desire of financial market participants to reach for yield and take on risk.
Our goal should be to deploy an enhanced arsenal of regulatory tools to address systemic risk, making the financial system far more robust.
That way, monetary policy can concentrate on its long-standing goals of price stability and maximum employment.
We have at our disposal a tool kit of regulatory instruments that are well adapted for this purpose.
Monetary policy cannot be a primary instrument for systemic risk management.
All the same, I cannot unequivocally rule out the possibility that situations could emerge in which monetary policy should play some role in reining in risk-taking behavior.
In the remainder of my remarks, I will discuss key issues that must be resolved before an effective policy regime for the containment of systemic risk can be established.
First, we must understand the sources of systemic risk and design surveillance practices that enable us to detect threats to financial stability early on.
Second, we must develop a tool kit of supervisory policy instruments--so-called macroprudential policies--and guidelines on how and when to deploy them.
And third, we must strive to avoid situations in which macroprudential and monetary policies are working at cross-purposes, given that macroprudential policies affect macroeconomic performance and that monetary policy may affect risk-taking incentives.
Interesting parallels may be drawn, however, between the design issues we face in macroprudential policy and those we have grappled with in conducting monetary policy.
The fertile field of monetary policy research may therefore offer lessons that can fruitfully be applied to managing systemic risk.
At its most basic level, systemic risk stems from the possibility that some event or sequence of events could result in severe impairment of the financial sector's ability to provide credit in the economy.
At their most extreme, such events can trigger panicky attempts to withdraw credit, creating runs that lead to failures of important financial institutions and, ultimately, systemic collapse.
If policymakers are to detect emerging threats to the financial system, we must understand the determinants of systemic risk and develop appropriate metrics for measuring it.
One factor is the accumulation in the financial sector of very high levels of risk and leverage, along with excessive reliance on unstable short-term funding.
The emergence of such behavior among the largest and most interconnected financial institutions is particularly dangerous, since these institutions are linchpins in our financial system and their failure could cause significant damage to large numbers of counterparties and the system as a whole, as the examples of Lehman Brothers and American International Group demonstrate.
A second element is a high positive correlation of risk exposures across institutions.
A wide array of commercial banks, investment banks, and other financial institutions held mortgages, mortgage-backed securities, or positions in mortgage-related derivatives.
The result was the massive vulnerability of the financial system to a collapse of housing prices.
What seemed like moderate risks taken by individual institutions ultimately led to an enormous risk to the system as a whole.
The intricate and opaque web of connections among financial players multiplies the dangers of contagion in the form of lost confidence, frozen liquidity, fire sales, and domino effects.4 A key factor in this channel of systemic risk is the institutional arrangements in payment, clearing, and settlement systems.
For example, weaknesses in the market infrastructure for repurchase agreements, or repos, and over-the-counter derivatives intensified the crisis.5 
Systemic risk reflects the confluence of factors that may grow slowly over years.
Therefore, surveillance must look at a variety of indicators and be forward looking, considering the paths of factors that influence such risk for years to come.
To facilitate timely recognition of the emergence of systemic risk, we should design quantifiable indicators related to the three elements I just outlined: risk buildup at systemically important institutions and within the financial sector more broadly, positive correlations of risk among financial market participants, and interconnectedness among those participants.
Systemic risk surveillance will demand Herculean efforts by the regulatory agencies and the Office of Financial Research created by the new legislation.
I see parallels between the way we take the pulse of the economy when considering monetary policy decisions and the way we should monitor and evaluate systemic risk when formulating macroprudential policies.
In practice, though, we regard certain metrics as most critical, such as gross domestic product, employment and unemployment, and inflation.
Similarly, in risk surveillance, we will gather an array of data on risk spreads, credit flows and volumes, asset prices, debt and leverage, markets, and institutions, including detailed, often proprietary, microdata on balance sheets and data from such markets as those for over-the-counter derivatives and repos.
Nonetheless, surveillance is likely to concentrate on key factors in the buildup of systemic risk such as the ones I identified: the accumulation of credit and funding risk on the balance sheets of systemically important institutions and throughout the financial system, the correlation of risk among financial market participants, and the extent of counterparty exposures.
Of course, we must also keep a close eye on broad credit and asset market conditions.
One strand of surveillance will involve watching variations of risk and term spreads of bonds and other securities relative to historical norms.
Narrow risk spreads and risk premiums may be a harbinger of excessive risk-taking by investors.
Another strand will focus more directly on measuring credit flows and exposures to credit risk.
If overall credit growth is extraordinarily rapid, it may be a sign that financial institutions are taking greater risks onto their balance sheets.
Because of financial system complexity, leverage is impossible to measure perfectly.
Still, real-time indicators of the leverage of financial intermediaries would help identify where we are in a credit cycle.
We may also monitor data on repo market activity and haircuts to spot vulnerabilities relating to maturity mismatches.
This information can be crosschecked against firm- and sector-level data on credit risk exposure.
One aspect of systemic risk surveillance that has garnered a great deal of attention is the identification of asset price bubbles.
Bubbles present systemic danger when major financial institutions use leverage to finance investment in risky assets that they hold on their balance sheets.
The systemic risk is multiplied when the asset bubble is accompanied by a credit bubble that fuels highly leveraged investment.6 So a top priority of systemic risk surveillance must be to assess whether asset price movements suggest the presence of a bubble and identify at an early stage those that might be particularly dangerous.
We will also need to monitor the cross-sectional correlations of firms' risk exposures.7 In addition, we need information on counterparty exposures through derivatives and other financial instruments.
Finally, further development of financial sector stress testing, building on the tests carried out in the United States in 2009 and in Europe this year, will provide valuable information about the ability of the financial system to weather significant economic or financial shocks.
We should refine the stress-testing methodology as we develop a more sophisticated understanding of institution-level systemic risk factors.
These enhancements can be carried out by the quantitative surveillance unit that we have already established in our supervision of the largest financial institutions to better integrate macroprudential considerations with regular supervisory practice.
The Fed recently introduced the Senior Credit Officer Opinion Survey on Dealer Financing Terms, adding to the information collected from the existing commercial bank Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices, a survey on credit supply and demand.8 
Systemic risk surveillance is both a science and an art: science in that we will analyze closely a wide range of data that research shows to be diagnostic, and art in that we will have to exercise judgment about when excesses become so dangerous that action is required.
The Fed and other regulators in the United States and abroad have made important progress in developing systemic risk indicators.
For that reason, we need a flexible approach that combines science and art, and judgmentally weighs information from all indicators.
The first tool is information to help focus attention in policy circles, and among investors and the public, on looming systemic risks.
The detailed financial stability reports published by the International Monetary Fund and a number of central banks are intended to serve this purpose.9 And the Financial Stability Oversight Council created under the Dodd-Frank Act is charged with preparing such a report once a year.
We know that market participants won't take kindly when limits are set precisely in those markets that are most exuberant, the ones in which they are making big money.
During the late stages of the housing boom, more than a few financial institution chief executive officers dismissed the warnings of their own risk managers with a wave of the hand.
They take the form of restrictions or incentives related to financial firms' balance sheets.
Still, macroprudential policies differ from purely microprudential approaches in that they are intended to protect the financial system as a whole and, by extension, the broader economy.
Macroprudential policies will be aimed at countering the pro-cyclical nature of credit and leverage, leaning against the wind when systemic risk is accumulating.
The Basel Committee on Banking Supervision is playing a key role in designing this new regulatory regime as part of the Basel III initiative.
And, under Federal Reserve leadership, initiatives to implement macroprudential supervision are well under way in the United States.
Policymakers here and abroad agree that macroprudential policy must include requirements to hold more and higher-quality capital.
And capital requirements must be reformulated to reduce the pro-cyclicality of credit and leverage.
Financial institutions may be required to build capital buffers in good times, which they can run down in bad times, thereby limiting credit growth during booms and mitigating credit contraction in downturns.
Banks may also be required to have, in addition to their standard equity buffers, contingent capital in the form of debt that is convertible to equity if they experience significant losses.
This additional capital would protect them from insolvency during busts while allowing them to benefit from debt finance in boom times.
regulators have also been charged with developing heightened prudential standards for systemically important institutions to constrain risk-taking by those firms whose failures would pose the greatest systemic risk.
One approach could involve imposing penalties or restrictions on financial firms based on factors such as the correlation of their strategies with those of other firms or by limiting risk exposure to individual counterparties.
Policies are on the drawing board to ensure that institutions avoid undue reliance on short-term debt and have adequate liquidity in market downturns.
Such requirements would diminish the risk of the shortfalls and hoarding that could fuel a credit market meltdown.
My expectation is that policies such as these will restrict dangerous pro-cyclical movements in debt and leverage, diminish the extent of maturity mismatches and the potential for runs, and discourage unsustainable asset price appreciation.
regulators have also taken steps to ensure that the financial institutions we supervise enforce compensation policies that control incentives for excessive pro-cyclical risk-taking.
Importantly, the Dodd-Frank Act significantly increases the trading of derivatives on exchanges and their clearing through central counterparties.10 Because clearinghouses are themselves subject to risk from counterparties and are important linchpins in the financial system, they must be regulated to ensure that they operate safely.
Since the implementation of macroprudential supervision is a work in progress, I want to highlight several important design considerations.
The first relates to the appropriate balance between fixed rules and discretion--a question familiar from monetary and fiscal policy.
In the realm of monetary policy, the Fed and other central banks commonly vary policy in a manner that researchers and market participants find predictable and systematic.
Indeed, guidance from policy rules is increasingly used in actual decisionmaking since rule-based recommendations create a sensible starting point for deliberations.
Rule-like behavior also aligns the expectations of markets and policymakers so that policy is transmitted quickly and effectively to the economy.
Nevertheless, neither fiscal nor monetary policymakers rely on fixed rules alone.
Discretionary fiscal policy has been helpful, even essential, in some instances in responding to economic fluctuations resulting from large shocks.
Similarly, in the realm of monetary policy, the Fed and other central banks certainly don't slavishly follow prescriptions from any rule.
In the implementation of macroprudential supervision, I believe it will be similarly advantageous to put in place a system of controls in which fixed rules play an important role while a place is preserved for the discretionary judgments of regulators.
Moreover, if discretionary macroprudential policy interventions are deferred until a boom is well under way, the macroeconomic spillovers could prove difficult for monetary policy to offset.
For these reasons, a stronger system of prudential controls designed to mitigate the buildup of systemic risk must be put into place, a system that will incorporate mechanisms to automatically counter pro-cyclical behavior.
For one thing, it's important to keep in mind that financial institutions have been very adept at gaming rule-based systems.
That's precisely what happened prior to the mortgage crisis, when leverage ballooned in the shadow banking system and investment banks and some nonbanks became principal participants in credit derivatives markets.
Furthermore, the financial system will evolve in ways that preclude any wholly rule-based system from countering all emerging systemic threats.
This concern derives from the observation that we still have a lot to learn about the behavior of financial institutions and their effects on systemic risk and the real economy.
Our ability to model the channels by which disruptions in credit and finance affect the real economy and the ways these effects feed back into the banking and financial systems is getting more sophisticated.11 But our understanding of the key channels, their quantitative importance, and the effects of our policies remain incomplete at best.
It is therefore important that we implement policies that are likely to succeed in mitigating systemic risk in a future crisis regardless of the precise triggers and transmission channels.
A rich monetary policy literature demonstrates that simple rules result in good, even excellent, performance when policymakers face uncertainty about the structure of the economy and the source of economic shocks.12 This conclusion may apply to macroprudential supervision as well.
A third consideration in the design of the macroprudential supervision relates to the need for extensive international cooperation.
If the United States were to go it alone with tough policies, we could see our financial institutions flee in a race to the bottom.
We are working closely with our international counterparts to develop coherent and comprehensive approaches, aided by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, the Financial Stability Board, the International Monetary Fund, and other institutions.13 
But, as with all forms of regulation, we must find the right balance between overly strict supervision and laissez faire.
I don't know exactly where on the continuum that balance lies.
One of the most challenging issues relating to systemic risk management is the appropriate interactions between macroprudential and monetary policy.
To what extent, if at all, should monetary policy be used to mitigate systemic risk? And to what extent, if at all, should monetary policy be coordinated with macroprudential supervision? These issues are the subject of intense debate among policymakers across the globe.
Of course, the question of whether monetary policy should lean against asset price bubbles is hardly new.14 What has changed is the sense of urgency surrounding this and related questions.
I noted previously--and it is now commonly accepted--that monetary policy can affect systemic risk through a number of channels.15 First, monetary policy has a direct effect on asset prices for the obvious reason that interest rates represent the opportunity costs of holding assets.
Indeed, an important element of the monetary transmission mechanism works through the asset price channel.
In theory, an increase in asset prices induced by a decline in interest rates should not cause asset prices to keep escalating in bubble-like fashion.
But if bubbles do develop, perhaps because of an onset of excessive optimism, and especially if the bubble is financed by debt, the result may be a buildup of systemic risk.
Second, recent research has identified possible linkages between monetary policy and leverage among financial intermediaries.16 It is conceivable that accommodative monetary policy could provide tinder for a buildup of leverage and excessive risk-taking in the financial system.
For example, research suggests that rigorous enforcement of supervisory standards for capital following the real estate-related loan losses of the early 1990s may have slowed the economy's recovery from the recession.
Today, we all understand the need for more stringent bank capital and liquidity requirements to stem systemic risk.
But, with high unemployment in so many economies, the new Basel III agreement recognizes the desirability of a phase in period for these standards.
The implementation of tighter standards over a multi-year period should mitigate the concern that the macroprudential policies we are putting in place to control systemic risk will unduly restrict the availability of credit, thereby retarding economic recovery.
In this case, as it should, the implementation of macroprudential policy is taking account of spillovers that monetary policy, at least now, cannot easily offset.
Some would argue that the conduct of macroprudential and monetary policy should be closely coordinated, even integrated, because of the spillovers I described.17 Indeed, the logic of this argument has led some observers to conclude that both macroprudential and monetary policy should be assigned to the central bank.18 As I noted, the Dodd-Frank Act assigned the Federal Reserve an important role in the conduct of macroprudential supervision, and for good reasons.
In addition, the insights derived from our supervisory role benefit the conduct of monetary policy.
But the pursuit of macroprudential supervision under the new legislation involves other regulatory agencies beside the Fed, and the new Financial Stability Oversight Council will play an important role.
And, of course, the Fed will keep sole responsibility for the conduct of monetary policy, retaining its independence.
One is that systemic risk surveillance will benefit from the perspectives of regulators with different windows on the financial system, all participating in the oversight council.
Second, the principle of central bank independence in the conduct of monetary policy is widely accepted as vital to achieving maximum employment and price stability.
Fortunately, it is perfectly possible to attain good outcomes even if monetary policy and macroprudential policy are carried out separately and independently, and the goals of each are pursued using entirely separate tool kits.
This conclusion is an application of the assignment problem made familiar by Robert Mundell and others who analyzed monetary and fiscal policy.19 A key insight from that literature is that satisfactory results can be attained without policy coordination, even though fully optimal policy generally calls for coordination when spillovers occur.
Of course, it is necessary for monetary policy to take into account any macroeconomic effects resulting from macroprudential policy and vice versa.
This separate-assignments approach to formulating macroprudential and monetary policy has merit both in theory and practice.
I noted, for example, that situations may arise in which the Federal Reserve, in its conduct of monetary policy, might not be able to fully offset the macroeconomic effects of macroprudential interventions.
This scenario could happen because of the zero bound on interest rates or monetary policy lags.
In such circumstances, it makes sense for macroprudential policy to take macroeconomic effects into account.
By the same token, I would not want to argue that it is never appropriate for monetary policy to take into account its potential effect on financial stability.
In such situations, if emerging threats to financial stability become evident, monetary policy could be faced with difficult tradeoffs.
Overall, I am encouraged by the progress we are making in developing the new regulatory framework.
It's important to be realistic about the challenges that lie ahead.
By its nature, policy designed to manage systemic risk fights dangers that may never lead to crises.
In this regard, it's worth recalling Paul Samuelson's quip that the stock market has predicted nine of the past five recessions.
Will future regulators and monetary policymakers be accused of bursting 10 of the past 2 asset bubbles?
We've all been asked, "Didn't you see this mortgage disaster coming? Why didn't you do anything about it?" Our task now is to implement intelligent policies to contain future bubbles and credit binges, and to make sure that those that do occur inflict a lot less damage on the economy.

I would like to thank John Williams and Sam Zuckerman, both of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, for assistance in preparing these remarks.
See Franklin Allen, Stephen Morris, and Hyun Song Shin (2006), "Beauty Contests and Iterated Expectations in Asset Markets ," Review of Financial Studies, vol.
See Hyun Shin (2009), "Financial Intermediation and the Post-Crisis Financial System ," paper presented at the 8th BIS Annual Conference, June 25-26.
See Payments Risk Committee (2010), Task Force on Tri‐Party Repo Infrastructure (626 KB PDF) (New York: PRC, May); and Darrell Duffie, Ada Li, and Theo Lubke (2010), "Policy Perspectives on OTC Derivatives Market Infrastructure ," Staff Report 424 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, January (revised March)).
See Tobias Adrian and Hyun Song Shin (2008), "Financial Intermediaries, Financial Stability, and Monetary Policy (1.4 MB PDF) ," paper presented at "Maintaining Stability in a Changing Financial System," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 21-23.
A number of promising measures of measuring systemic risk that take into account the correlations of firms' strategies have recently been developed.
For example, the CoVaR approach aims to measure the marginal contribution of a financial institution to systemic risk, where systemic risk is measured by the value at risk of all firms together; see Tobias Adrian and Markus K.
Brunnermeier (2009), "CoVaR (766 KB PDF) ," Staff Report 348 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August).
See also the risk topography approach discussed in Markus K.
These surveys are available on the Federal Reserve Board's website.
See International Monetary Fund (2010), Global Financial Stability Report: Meeting New Challenges to Stability and Building a Safer System (6 MB PDF) (Washington: IMF).
For example, see Bank of England (2010), Financial Stability Report (London: BOE).
Brunnermeier and Yuliy Sannikov (2010), "A Macroeconomic Model with a Financial Sector (880 KB PDF) ," unpublished paper, May; Vasco Curdia and Michael Woodford (2009), "Credit Spreads and Monetary Policy ," Staff Report 385 (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, August); Mark Gertler and Peter Karadi (2009), "A Model of Unconventional Monetary Policy," manuscript, New York University, April; and the references therein.
Williams (forthcoming), "Simple and Robust Rules for Monetary Policy," in Benjamin Friedman and Michael Woodford, eds., Handbook of Monetary Economics (Amsterdam: North-Holland).
See John Lipsky (2010), "Reconsidering the International Monetary System," panel presentation at the "Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead ," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26-28.
Bernanke and Mark Gertler (1999), "Monetary Policy and Asset Price Volatility (301 KB PDF) ," paper presented at "New Challenges for Monetary Policy," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26-28; Stephen G.
Wadhwani (2000), Geneva Reports on the World Economy 2: Asset Prices and Central Bank Policy (London: Centre for Economic Policy Research); and Donald L.
Kohn (2006), "Monetary Policy and Asset Prices," speech delivered at "Monetary Policy: A Journey from Theory to Practice," a European Central Bank colloquium held in honor of Otmar Issing, Frankfurt, Germany, March 16.
Yellen (2009), "Linkages between Monetary and Regulatory Policy: Lessons from the Crisis," presentation to the Institute of Regulation and Risk, North Asia, held in Hong Kong, November 17; and Charles Bean, Matthias Paustian, Adrian Penalver, and Tim Taylor (2010), "Monetary Policy after the Fall (800 KB PDF) ," paper presented at "Macroeconomic Challenges: The Decade Ahead," a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, held in Jackson Hole, Wyo., August 26-28.
See Tobias Adrian and Hyun Song Shin (2009), "Money, Liquidity, and Monetary Policy (230 KB PDF) ," American Economic Review, vol.
See Bean and others, "Monetary Policy after the Fall," in note 15, for a discussion of the interaction of monetary and macroprudential policies.
Stulz (2010), The Squam Lake Report: Fixing the Financial System (Princeton: Princeton University Press).
Mundell (1962), "Appropriate Use of Monetary and Fiscal Policy for Internal and External Stability," in International Monetary Fund Staff Papers, vol.

Indeed, in the United States, governments at all levels are grappling not only with the near-term effects of economic weakness, but also with the longer-run pressures that will be generated by the need to provide health care and retirement security to an aging population.
But history makes clear that countries that continually spend beyond their means suffer slower growth in incomes and living standards and are prone to greater economic and financial instability.
Conversely, good fiscal management is a cornerstone of sustainable growth and prosperity.
Although state and local governments face significant fiscal challenges, my primary focus today will be the federal budget situation and its economic implications.1 I will describe the factors underlying current and projected budget deficits and explain why it is crucially important that we put U.S.
I will also offer some thoughts on whether new fiscal rules or institutions might help promote a successful transition to fiscal sustainability in the United States.
The budgetary position of the federal government has deteriorated substantially during the past two fiscal years, with the budget deficit averaging 9-1/2 percent of national income during that time.
The recent deterioration was largely the result of a sharp decline in tax revenues brought about by the recession and the subsequent slow recovery, as well as by increases in federal spending needed to alleviate the recession and stabilize the financial system.
As a result of these deficits, the accumulated federal debt measured relative to national income has increased to a level not seen since the aftermath of World War II.
For now, the budget deficit has stabilized and, so long as the economy and financial markets continue to recover, it should narrow relative to national income over the next few years.
Economic conditions provide little scope for reducing deficits significantly further over the next year or two; indeed, premature fiscal tightening could put the recovery at risk.
If current policy settings are maintained, and under reasonable assumptions about economic growth, the federal budget will be on an unsustainable path in coming years, with the ratio of federal debt held by the public to national income rising at an increasing pace.2 Moreover, as the national debt grows, so will the associated interest payments, which in turn will lead to further increases in projected deficits.
Expectations of large and increasing deficits in the future could inhibit current household and business spending--for example, by reducing confidence in the longer-term prospects for the economy or by increasing uncertainty about future tax burdens and government spending--and thus restrain the recovery.
Concerns about the government's long-run fiscal position may also constrain the flexibility of fiscal policy to respond to current economic conditions.
Accordingly, steps taken today to improve the country's longer-term fiscal position would not only help secure longer-term economic and financial stability, they could also improve the near-term economic outlook.
Our fiscal challenges are especially daunting because they are mostly the product of powerful underlying trends, not short-term or temporary factors.
Two of the most important driving forces are the aging of the U.S.
As the health-care needs of the aging population increase, federal health-care programs are on track to be by far the biggest single source of fiscal imbalances over the longer term.
Indeed, the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projects that the ratio of federal spending for health-care programs (principally Medicare and Medicaid) to national income will double over the next 25 years, and continue to rise significantly further after that.3 The ability to control health-care costs as our population gets older, while still providing high-quality care to those who need it, will be critical not only for budgetary reasons but for maintaining the dynamism of the broader economy as well.
population will also strain Social Security, as the number of workers paying taxes into the system rises more slowly than the number of people receiving benefits.
By 2030, when most of the baby boomers will have retired, this ratio is projected to decline to around 3, and it may subsequently fall yet further as life expectancies continue to increase.
Overall, the projected fiscal pressures associated with Social Security are considerably smaller than the pressures associated with federal health programs, but they still present a significant challenge to policymakers.
The same underlying trends affecting federal finances will also put substantial pressures on state and local budgets, as organizations like yours have helped to highlight.4 In Rhode Island, as in other states, the retirement of state employees, together with continuing increases in health-care costs, will cause public pension and retiree health-care obligations to become increasingly difficult to meet.
Estimates of unfunded pension liabilities for the states as whole span a wide range, but some researchers put the figure as high as $2 trillion at the end of 2009.5 Estimates of states' liabilities for retiree health benefits are even more uncertain because of the difficulty of projecting medical costs decades into the future.
It may be scant comfort, but the United States is not alone in facing fiscal challenges.
The global recession has dealt a blow to the fiscal positions of most other advanced economies, and, as in the United States, their expenditures for public health care and pensions are expected to rise substantially in the coming decades as their populations age.7 Indeed, the population of the United States overall is younger than those of a number of European countries as well as Japan.8 
Let me return to the issue of longer-term fiscal sustainability.
Almost by definition, unsustainable trajectories of deficits and debts will never actually transpire, because creditors would never be willing to lend to a country in which the fiscal debt relative to the national income is rising without limit.
Herbert Stein, a wise economist, once said, "If something cannot go on forever, it will stop."9 One way or the other, fiscal adjustments sufficient to stabilize the federal budget will certainly occur at some point.
The only real question is whether these adjustments will take place through a careful and deliberative process that weighs priorities and gives people plenty of time to adjust to changes in government programs or tax policies, or whether the needed fiscal adjustments will be a rapid and painful response to a looming or actual fiscal crisis.
Collecting revenues through a more efficient, better-designed tax system could improve economic growth and make achieving sustainable fiscal policies at least somewhat easier.
Likewise, many federal spending programs doubtless could be reformed to achieve their stated objectives more effectively and at lower cost.
Failing to address our unsustainable fiscal situation exposes our country to serious economic costs and risks.
In the short run, as I have noted, concerns and uncertainty about exploding future deficits could make households, businesses, and investors more cautious about spending, capital investment, and hiring.
In the longer term, a rising level of government debt relative to national income is likely to put upward pressure on interest rates and thus inhibit capital formation, productivity, and economic growth.
Larger government deficits increase our reliance on foreign lenders, all else being equal, implying that the share of U.S.
national income devoted to paying interest to foreign investors will increase over time.
Income paid to foreign investors is not available for domestic consumption or investment.
For example, large tax increases that might be imposed to cover the rising interest on the debt would slow potential growth by reducing incentives to work, save, hire, and invest.
Finally, a large federal debt decreases the flexibility of policymakers to temporarily increase spending as needed to address future emergencies, such as recessions, wars, or natural disasters.
It would be difficult to identify a specific threshold at which federal debt begins to pose more substantial costs and risks to the nation's economy.
Perhaps no bright line exists; the costs and risks may grow more or less continuously as the federal debt rises.
What we do know, however, is that the threat to our economy is real and growing, which should be sufficient reason for fiscal policymakers to put in place a credible plan for bringing deficits down to sustainable levels over the medium term.
Amid all of the uncertainty surrounding the long-term economic and budgetary outlook, one certainty is that both current and future Congresses and Presidents will have to make some very tough decisions to put the budget back on a sustainable trajectory.
Can these tough decisions be made easier for our elected leaders? At various times, some U.S.
Congresses and foreign governments have adopted fiscal rules to help structure the budget process.
In the remainder of my remarks I will discuss the use of fiscal rules to address longer-term budget problems, beginning with a review of the U.S.
The United States has seen several attempts to apply fiscal rules, with mixed results.
In 1985, the Congress enacted the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law which, among other things, specified a target path for the federal deficit, including the elimination of the deficit by 1991.
One problem with this approach was that its primary focus and measure of success was the current budget deficit.
Although the emphasis on the current deficit was understandable, the approach ran aground of the fact that the budget deficit is driven not only by the choices of the Congress, but also by the performance of the economy.
If the economy is strong, for example, the deficit is almost bound to improve, as tax revenues increase and spending on the social safety net decreases; conversely, if the economy weakens, the deficit is likely to rise, notwithstanding prior efforts by the Congress to better manage government spending and taxes.

First, this alternative approach capped the level of discretionary federal spending--that is, the spending subject to annual appropriations, including defense and nondefense purchases of goods and services.
Supported importantly by the strong economic growth of the 1990s, these rules are seen by many observers as having helped put the deficit on a declining path; indeed, the federal government generated a few annual surpluses.
The discretionary spending caps and the PAYGO rule were allowed to expire after the 2001 fiscal year, in part because concerns about deficits were waning at the time.
Putting aside these details of implementation, given current budgetary challenges, the key question is whether the traditional PAYGO approach is sufficiently ambitious.
Even before the recent financial crisis and recession, however, the enforcement mechanisms for these rules did not prevent these targets from being breached, and fiscal problems in several euro-area countries have recently been a source of financial and economic stress.

Although fiscal rules have not been panaceas in the United States or the euro area as a whole, a number of other economies, in Europe and elsewhere, seemed to have found fiscal rules to be helpful in achieving greater budget discipline.
A number of emerging market nations, such as Chile, have also applied fiscal rules with some success.
According to the International Monetary Fund, about 80 countries currently are subject to national or supranational fiscal rules.10 
By shining a light on the problem and the range of feasible solutions, transparent policy rules clarify the budget choices that must be made, help the public understand those choices, and encourage policymakers to recognize the broader fiscal consequences of their decisions on individual programs.
In the United States, the nonpartisan CBO has ably served that role since 1974.
Admittedly, an important difficulty with developing rules for long-term fiscal sustainability in the United States is that, given the importance of health-care spending in the federal budget, the CBO would need to forecast health-care costs and the potential effects of alternative policy measures on those costs well into the future.
In the past few years, the recession and the financial crisis, along with the policy actions taken to buffer their effects, have eroded our fiscal situation.
An improving economy should reduce near-term deficits, but our public finances are nevertheless on an unsustainable path in the longer term, reflecting in large part our aging population and the continual rise in health-care costs.
We should not underestimate these fiscal challenges; failing to respond to them would endanger our economic future.
Well-designed fiscal rules cannot substitute for the political will to take difficult decisions, but U.S.
and international experience suggests that they can be helpful to legislators in certain circumstances.
Indeed, installing a fiscal rule could provide an important signal to the public that the Congress is serious about achieving long-term fiscal sustainability, which itself would be good for confidence.

Bernanke (2010), "Challenges for the Economy and State Governments," speech delivered at the Annual Meeting of the Southern Legislative Conference of the Council of State Governments, held in Charleston, S.C., August 2.
Stabilizing the ratio of federal debt to national income requires that spending on everything other than interest payments on the debt be brought into rough alignment with tax revenues over time.
Equivalently, the so-called primary budget deficit (the budget deficit exclusive of interest payments) must be reduced to zero.
See the two long-term scenarios for mandatory federal spending on health care shown in figure 2-3, p.
See International Monetary Fund (2010), Navigating the Fiscal Challenges Ahead, IMF Fiscal Monitor Series (Washington: IMF, May).
For example, see Neil Howe and Richard Jackson (2003), The 2003 Aging Vulnerability Index (Washington: Center for Strategic and International Studies and Watson Wyatt Worldwide, March).
See the International Monetary Fund (2009), Fiscal Rules--Anchoring Expectations for Sustainable Public Finances (779 KB PDF) (Washington: IMF, December).

At the Federal Reserve System Town Hall Meeting with Educators, Washington, D.C.
On behalf of my colleagues throughout the Federal Reserve System, I want to thank you for joining us today.
As educators, your work is critical to our economy and our nation.
The economist Alfred Marshall said that economics is the study of people in the ordinary business of life.1 What could be more fundamental? Learning about economics helps students understand how the decisions of millions of people about what to produce and consume determine what Adam Smith called "the wealth of nations"--our living standards.2  In particular, economics helps students understand both the strengths and the shortcomings of our market-based economic system.
I am sure that your students have been eager to understand the economic and financial events of the past few years.
The recent financial crisis was among the most profound challenges to economic and financial stability since the Great Depression, and its causes and its ultimate remedies have been, and will continue to be, widely debated.
 Today, students need a solid understanding of the benefits and risks of borrowing money to buy a car or a home, and of the effect that too much credit card debt can have on their finances.
Besides improving their personal financial decisionmaking, teaching your students economic principles will help them as citizens understand and make choices about many of the critical issues confronting our nation.
The Federal Reserve works hard to advance financial literacy and economic education--both through our own programs and by working with other organizations.3  Our financial education website provides easy access to free educational materials, a resource search engine for teachers, and games for students of various ages and knowledge levels.4  Some Reserve Banks offer economic and financial education workshops for teachers, and several Reserve Banks periodically provide lessons in personal finance to middle school and high school students.
A number of the Reserve Banks also run academic competitions for middle school, high school, and college students, such as the Fed Challenge, Econ Bowl, and essay contests.
And some Reserve Banks have opened learning centers or museums in their lobbies that feature interactive exhibits and related educational programs.
And, as a central banker, economist, educator, and parent, I thank you for your work.
I also applaud the ongoing partnerships between regional Reserve Banks and educators, and I would like to express my appreciation to the Federal Reserve staff for their work in coordinating our discussion today.
Our partners include groups such as JumpStart, Junior Achievement, the Council for Economic Education, the National Endowment for Financial Education, and the American Savings Education Council.

At the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta Financial Markets Conference, Sea Island, Georgia (via satellite)
Chairman Bernanke presented identical remarks to the Risk Transfer Mechanisms and Financial Stability Workshop, Basel, Switzerland, on May 29, 2008 (via videoconference)
Well-functioning financial markets are an essential link in the transmission of monetary policy to the economy and a critical foundation for economic growth and stability.
A sharp housing contraction has generated substantial losses on many mortgage-related assets and a broad-based tightening in credit availability.
Consistent with its role as the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve has responded not only with an easing of monetary policy but also with a number of steps aimed at reducing funding pressures for depository institutions and primary securities dealers and at improving overall market liquidity and market functioning.1
In my remarks today, I will begin by reviewing the principles that should guide central banks' actions to support market liquidity.
Then, in light of those principles, I will discuss the liquidity measures implemented by the Federal Reserve in response to the financial turmoil.
I will conclude by offering some thoughts on liquidity regulation.
The notion that a central bank should provide liquidity to the banking system in a crisis has a long intellectual lineage.
Walter Bagehot's Lombard Street, published in 1873, remains one of the classic treatments of the role of the central bank in the management of financial crises.
Bagehot noted that the basis of a successful credit system is confidence.
He pointed out that confidence is particularly important in banking and in other situations in which the lender's own liabilities are viewed as very liquid by its creditors.
Meeting creditors' demands for payment requires holding liquidity--cash, essentially, or close equivalents.
It would be unprofitable because cash pays a lower return than other investments.
And it would be socially undesirable, because an excessive preference for liquid assets reduces society's ability to fund longer-term investments that carry a high return but cannot be liquidated quickly.
How should a central bank respond to a sharp increase in the demand for cash or equivalents by private creditors? Before talking about Bagehot's answer, I should note that the Bank of England in his time was a hybrid institution--it was privately owned by shareholders, but it also had a public role.
To fulfill its public role, the Bank of England did not in all cases maximize its profits; notably, it held a larger share of its assets in liquid form than did other banks, thereby foregoing some return.
Nevertheless, in the context of the gold standard, the Bank's stock of liquid assets was relatively modest in size, raising the possibility that even this quasi-public institution could run out of cash should the demand for liquidity become high enough.2 In this context, Bagehot's advice on how the Bank of England should respond to a generalized liquidity shortage was somewhat counterintuitive.
A good banker will have accumulated in ordinary times the reserve he is to make use of in extraordinary times.
And what are the terms at which the central bank should lend freely? Bagehot argues that "these loans should only be made at a very high rate of interest" (p.
Some modern commentators have rationalized Bagehot's dictum to lend at a high or "penalty" rate as a way to mitigate moral hazard--that is, to help maintain incentives for private-sector banks to provide for adequate liquidity in advance of any crisis.
I will return to the issue of moral hazard later.
But it is worth pointing out briefly that, in fact, the risk of moral hazard did not appear to be Bagehot's principal motivation for recommending a high rate; rather, he saw it as a tool to dissuade unnecessary borrowing and thus to help protect the Bank of England's own finite store of liquid assets.3 Today, potential limitations on the central bank's lending capacity are not nearly so pressing an issue as in Bagehot's time, when the central bank's ability to provide liquidity was far more tenuous.
Bagehot defined a financial crisis largely in terms of a banking panic--that is, a situation in which depositors rapidly and simultaneously attempt to withdraw funds from their bank accounts.
In the 19th century, such panics were a lethal threat for banks that were financing long-term loans with demand deposits that could be called at any time.
Nonetheless, recent events demonstrate that liquidity risks are always present for institutions--banks and nonbanks alike--that finance illiquid assets with short-term liabilities.
More broadly, a loss of confidence in credit ratings led to a sharp contraction in the asset-backed commercial paper market as short-term investors withdrew their funds.
And remarkably, some financial institutions have even experienced pressures in rolling over maturing repurchase agreements (repos).
Such forced asset sales can set up a particularly adverse dynamic, in which further substantial price declines fan investor concerns about counterparty credit risk, which then feed back in the form of intensifying funding pressures.
Recent research by Allen and Gale (2007) confirms that, in principle at least, "fire sales" forced by sharp increases in investors' liquidity preference can drive asset prices below their fundamental value, at significant cost to the financial system and the economy.
Their work underscores the basic logic in Bagehot's prescription for crisis management: A central bank may be able to eliminate, or at least attenuate, adverse outcomes by making cash loans secured by borrowers' illiquid but sound assets.
Thus, borrowers can avoid selling securities into an illiquid market, and the potential for economic damage--arising, for example, from the unavailability of credit for productive purposes or the inefficient liquidation of long-term investments--is substantially reduced.
This prescription for providing liquidity in a crisis is simple in theory, but, in practice, it can be far more complicated.
For instance, how should the central bank distinguish between institutions whose liquidity pressures stem primarily from a breakdown in financial market functioning and those whose problems fundamentally derive from underlying concerns about their solvency? The answer, at times, is by no means straightforward.
Central banks provide liquidity through a variety of mechanisms, including open market operations and direct credit extension through standing lending facilities.
The European Central Bank (ECB), for example, routinely conducts open market operations with a wide range of counterparties against a broad range of collateral.
In recent months, in light of intense pressures in term funding markets, the ECB has provided relatively large quantities of reserves through longer-term open market operations.
The Bank of England has followed a similar strategy, expanding their term open market operations and accepting a wider range of collateral.
Very recently, the Bank of England also initiated a special liquidity facility that allows banks to swap high-quality mortgage-backed and other securities for U.K.
Differences in legal and institutional structure have affected the methods used by various central banks to inject liquidity in their markets.
In the United States, in ordinary circumstances only depository institutions have direct access to the discount window, and open market operations are conducted with just a small set of primary dealers against a narrow range of highly liquid collateral.
In contrast, in jurisdictions with universal banking, the distinction between depository institutions and other types of financial institutions is much less relevant in defining access to central bank liquidity than is the case in the United States.
Moreover, some central banks (such as the ECB) have greater flexibility than the Federal Reserve in the types of collateral they can accept in open market operations.
As a result, some foreign central banks have been able to address the recent liquidity pressures within their existing frameworks without resorting to extraordinary measures.
In contrast, the Federal Reserve has had to use methods it does not usually employ to address liquidity pressures across a number of markets and institutions.
In effect, the Federal Reserve has had to innovate in large part to achieve what other central banks have been able to effect through existing tools.
The financial distress since August has also underscored the importance of international cooperation among central banks.
For some time, central banks have recognized that managing crises involving large financial institutions operating across national borders and in multiple currencies can present difficult challenges.
In such cases, central banks may find it essential to work closely together.
For just this reason, the Federal Reserve, the ECB, and the Swiss National Bank have established currency swap arrangements and have coordinated their provision of dollar liquidity to international financial institutions over recent months.
In the United States, open market operations have long been the principal tool used by the Federal Reserve to manage the aggregate level of reserves in the banking system and thereby control the federal funds rate.
The discount window has typically functioned as a backstop, serving as a source of reserves when conditions in the federal funds market tighten significantly or when individual depository institutions experience short-term funding pressures.
Throughout much of the Federal Reserve's history, this basic structure has proven adequate to address liquidity pressures, even during some periods of market turmoil.
However, it became abundantly clear that this traditional framework for liquidity provision was not up to addressing the recent strains in short-term funding markets.
In particular, the efficacy of the discount window has been limited by the reluctance of depository institutions to use the window as a source of funding.
The "stigma" associated with the discount window, which if anything intensifies during periods of crisis, arises primarily from banks' concerns that market participants will draw adverse inferences about their financial condition if their borrowing from the Federal Reserve were to become known.
The Federal Reserve has taken steps to make discount window borrowing through the regular primary credit program more attractive.
Most notably, we narrowed the spread of the primary credit rate over the target federal funds rate from 100 basis points in August to only 25 basis points today.
Moreover, the existence of the option to borrow through the discount window, even if not exercised, likely has improved confidence by assuring depository institutions that backstop liquidity will be available should they need it.
Still, the continuing disruptions in short-term funding markets over recent months suggested that new ways of providing liquidity were necessary.
Last December, the Federal Reserve introduced the Term Auction Facility, or TAF, through which predetermined amounts of discount window credit are auctioned every two weeks to eligible borrowers for terms of 28 days.
In effect, TAF auctions are very similar to open market operations, but conducted with depository institutions rather than primary dealers and against a much broader range of collateral than is accepted in standard open market operations.
The TAF, apparently because of its competitive auction format and the certainty that a large amount of credit would be made available, appears to have overcome the stigma problem to a significant degree.
The TAF has also simplified the implementation of monetary policy by providing greater predictability of the level of borrowings by depository institutions and consequently of bank reserves.
The recent market turmoil has also affected the liquidity positions of financial institutions that do not ordinarily have access to the discount window.
Consequently, dealers' liquidity management policies and contingency plans were typically based on the assumption that they would not be faced with a sudden loss of financing.
As I have already noted, recent events have proven that assumption unwarranted, and the risk developed that liquidity pressures might force dealers to sell assets into already illiquid markets.
This might have resulted in Allen and Gale's fire sale scenario that I mentioned earlier, in which a cascade of failures and liquidations sharply depresses asset prices, with adverse financial and economic implications.
This heightened risk led the Federal Reserve to expand its ability to supply liquidity to primary dealers.
In March, to ease strains that had developed in the agency mortgage-backed securities market, the Federal Reserve initiated as part of its open-market operations a series of single-tranche repurchase transactions with terms of roughly 28 days and cumulating to up to $100 billion.
For the purposes of these transactions, primary dealers can deliver as collateral any securities eligible in conventional open market operations.
Additionally, the Federal Reserve introduced the Term Securities Lending Facility (TSLF), which allows primary dealers to exchange less-liquid securities for Treasury securities for terms of 28 days at an auction-determined fee.
Recently, the Federal Reserve expanded the list of securities eligible for such transactions to include all AAA/Aaa-rated asset-backed securities.
By mid-March, however, the pressures in short-term financing markets intensified, and market participants were speculating about the financial condition of Bear Stearns, a prominent investment bank.
On March 13, Bear advised the Federal Reserve and other government agencies that its liquidity position had significantly deteriorated, and that it would be forced to file for bankruptcy the next day unless alternative sources of funds became available.
If they responded to losses or the unexpected illiquidity of their holdings by pulling back from providing secured financing to other firms, a much broader liquidity crisis would have ensued.
In such circumstances, the Federal Reserve Board judged that it was appropriate to use its emergency lending authorities under the Federal Reserve Act to avoid a disorderly closure of Bear.
Accordingly, the Federal Reserve, in close consultation with the Treasury Department, agreed to provide short-term funding to Bear Stearns through JPMorgan Chase.
The Federal Reserve, again in close consultation with the Treasury Department, agreed to supply term funding, secured by $30 billion in Bear Stearns assets, to facilitate the purchase.
In a further effort to short-circuit a possible downward spiral in financing markets, the Federal Reserve used its emergency authorities to create the Primary Dealer Credit Facility (PDCF).
The PDCF allows primary dealers to borrow at the same rate at which depository institutions can access the discount window, with the borrowings able to be secured by a broad range of investment-grade securities.
In effect, the PDCF provides primary dealers with a liquidity backstop similar to the discount window for depository institutions in generally sound financial condition.
To date, our liquidity measures appear to have contributed to some improvement in financing markets.
For example, spreads on agency mortgage-backed securities have dropped in recent weeks after reaching very high levels in mid-March, as have spreads between conforming fixed-rate mortgage rates and Treasury rates.
Spreads on jumbo mortgage loans have retraced a portion of their earlier large increases, but recent regulatory and legislative changes make it difficult to assess the impact of liquidity measures in that segment of the market.
A number of securitization markets remain moribund, risk spreads--although off their recent peaks--generally remain quite elevated, and pressures in short-term funding markets persist.
Spreads of term dollar Libor over comparable-maturity overnight index swap rates have receded some from their recent peaks but remain abnormally high.4 Funding pressures have also been evident in the strong participation at recent TAF auctions even after the recent expansions in auction sizes, and, of late, depository institutions have borrowed significant amounts under the primary credit program for terms of up to 90 days.
Ultimately, market participants themselves must address the fundamental sources of financial strains--through deleveraging, raising new capital, and improving risk management--and this process is likely to take some time.
The Federal Reserve's various liquidity measures should help facilitate that process indirectly by boosting investor confidence and by reducing the risks of severe disruption during the period of adjustment.
Once financial conditions become more normal, the extraordinary provision of liquidity by the Federal Reserve will no longer be needed.
As Bagehot would surely advise, under normal conditions financial institutions should look to private counterparties and not central banks as a source of ongoing funding.
The provision of liquidity by a central bank can help mitigate a financial crisis.
However, central banks face a tradeoff when deciding to provide extraordinary liquidity support.
A central bank that is too quick to act as liquidity provider of last resort risks inducing moral hazard; specifically, if market participants come to believe that the Federal Reserve or other central banks will take such measures whenever financial stress develops, financial institutions and their creditors would have less incentive to pursue suitable strategies for managing liquidity risk and more incentive to take such risks.
Although central banks should give careful consideration to their criteria for invoking extraordinary liquidity measures, the problem of moral hazard can perhaps be most effectively addressed by prudential supervision and regulation that ensures that financial institutions manage their liquidity risks effectively in advance of the crisis.
Recall Bagehot's advice: "The time for economy and for accumulation is before.
A good banker will have accumulated in ordinary times the reserve he is to make use of in extraordinary times" (p.
Indeed, under the international Basel II capital accord, supervisors are expected to require that institutions have adequate processes in place to measure and manage risk, importantly including liquidity risk.
In light of the recent experience, and following the recommendations of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), the Federal Reserve and other supervisors are reviewing their policies and guidance regarding liquidity risk management to determine what improvements can be made.
In particular, future liquidity planning will have to take into account the possibility of a sudden loss of substantial amounts of secured financing.
Of course, even the most carefully crafted regulations cannot ensure that liquidity crises will not happen again.
But, if moral hazard is effectively mitigated, and if financial institutions and investors draw appropriate lessons from the recent experience about the need for strong liquidity risk management practices, the frequency and severity of future crises should be significantly reduced.

"Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March.
government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
The New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in the trades on behalf of the Federal Reserve System to implement monetary policy.
Such a circumstance could arise in two ways: The banking reserve--that is, the liquid assets backing deposits at the Bank of England--could fall to a low level as a result of heavy discounting or the issue reserve--that is gold bullion backing Bank of England notes--could run short because of substantial redemptions by note holders.
Indeed, the Bank of England's gold reserves, its ultimate store of liquidity, along with the gold in circulation, were quite small relative to total sterling deposits in the U.K.
99) and ensure that "no one may borrow out of idle precaution without paying well for it; that the [Bank of England's] reserve may be protected as far as possible" (p.
Moreover, as Clapham (1945) observed, higher interest rates during a period of crisis would draw in gold from abroad, easing strains on the Bank.

 I would like to thank NeighborWorks America for inviting me to be with you today to continue the very important discussion of community stabilization in the wake of rising foreclosures in neighborhoods across the country.
 Today's discussion of the impact of foreclosures on neighborhoods and what can be done to mitigate those impacts is not only timely, it is essential to promoting local and regional economic recovery and growth.
This morning, I will provide an overview of current conditions in the mortgage market and discuss how the disruption in this market is affecting neighborhoods.
 I will also outline the steps that the Federal Reserve System is taking to address these challenges and assist communities struggling with the impact of foreclosures.
The mortgage market continues to face challenges, especially in the subprime segment, which serves consumers who have imperfect or limited credit histories.
 The delinquency rate on subprime mortgages has continued to climb and has about doubled in the past year and, as of February, one in four subprime adjustable-rate mortgages was seriously delinquent, meaning the borrower was either in foreclosure or ninety days or more past due on a payment.
 And in the current economic environment, job losses have continued to contribute to the rise in mortgage delinquencies and foreclosures, particularly in areas of the Midwest, such as here in Ohio.
 In some cases, lenders originated mortgages that had multiple risk factors--a practice often referred to as risk-layering.
 Taken individually, these risk factors may not have significantly raised the likelihood that a homeowner would fall behind on payments; taken together, however, these risks materially increased this likelihood.
 Recent research conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston suggests that homeowners who have experienced a 20 percent or greater fall in house prices are about 14 times more likely to default on a mortgage compared with homeowners who have experienced a 20 percent increase in the price of their home.1  Some types of mortgage borrowers appear to be particularly sensitive to home-price declines; at least 18 percent of foreclosures started in the third quarter of 2007 involved non-owner-occupied properties.
The Federal Reserve's Response to the Challenges Resulting from Foreclosures
The Federal Reserve views the current high rate of mortgage foreclosures as an urgent problem, and we are addressing the issue on many fronts:  we are contributing to initiatives already underway at the local and national level, as well as collaborating with other regulators, community groups, policy organizations, financial institutions, and public officials in an effort to identify ways to prevent unnecessary foreclosures and the associated negative effects on local communities.
 We are also leveraging the decentralized structure of the Federal Reserve System, which consists of the Board of Governors in Washington, D.C., and the twelve Federal Reserve Banks that each represent a distinct region of the country.
 This structure enables us to gather information and tailor responses to foreclosure issues at the local level, while using our collective experience to address regional and national policy issues.
 In addition, the Federal Reserve uses its considerable analytic resources to conduct research at the national level, which the Reserve Banks can disseminate to local community groups, counseling agencies, financial institutions, and others who are working to help troubled borrowers and communities.

 To that end, the Federal Reserve recently helped NeighborWorks America identify those regions and neighborhoods throughout the country that are most at risk for higher rates of foreclosure and would therefore benefit from an increased capacity to provide mortgage counseling.

The Federal Reserve has recently made available on its public website detailed reports identifying neighborhoods that have especially high concentrations of foreclosures.
 These data--in the form of dynamic maps and other data--illustrate the regional variation in the condition of securitized, owner-occupied subprime and alt-A mortgage loans across the United States.2  Local leaders can access these reports and work with community affairs staff at the local Reserve Banks to more effectively address foreclosure problems.
 They also depict factors such as "Share of low FICO and high LTV" and "Share late payment in last 12 months" that may help to predict which areas are most likely to experience higher rates of foreclosures.
 Finally, the Federal Reserve is providing, via downloadable files, the data supporting the maps, as well as data for scores of other loan-performance variables at the state, metropolitan area, and county levels.
 By making more data and information on emerging trends available to key local leaders, financial institutions, and community organizations, our aim is to improve the efficiency of their efforts to rebuild neighborhoods.
The Federal Reserve System has also established a working group of economists and community development experts in order to coordinate System research efforts.
 Currently, the group is assessing existing research on house prices, mortgages, and foreclosures, with the goal of identifying important analytical gaps.
The Federal Reserve System conducts outreach and education efforts through its regular contact with financial institutions and market intermediaries, as well as through its network of Community Affairs staff members who work with communities to identify trends and issues affecting low- and moderate-income neighborhoods.
 This communication with both financial markets and communities allows the Federal Reserve to act as a bridge between the two groups and between local communities and the organizations that provide community resources, such as credit counselors.
 Therefore, the Federal Reserve is engaged in a number of efforts to encourage the use of loss-mitigation tools by lenders, servicers, and not-for-profit organizations that help individual borrowers resolve delinquency issues.
 The cost of foreclosure is high for everyone involved; estimates of the direct losses resulting from a foreclosure range from one-fifth to one-half the principal balance of a mortgage loan.3  With these costs in mind, the Federal Reserve, together with the other federal banking agencies, has issued guidance urging lenders and servicers to pursue workout arrangements, when feasible and prudent, as an alternative to foreclosure.
 In some cases, temporary adjustments to payments may not be sufficient, and more-permanent reductions in interest rates or an extension of the loan term may be required to help a borrower.
 In some situations, lenders and servicers may want to consider using principal writedowns as a way to reduce re-default risk or to facilitate a refinancing.
 We recently hosted focus groups to evaluate regulatory proposals on credit disclosures and held a series of informative hearings on the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA) regulations.
 The Board then issued a regulatory proposal under HOEPA that called for stricter regulations to prohibit unfair and deceptive practices in the mortgage market.
 By targeting protections to borrowers who face the most risk of experiencing unfair or deceptive practices, the proposal seeks to protect consumers and preserve consumer choice in mortgage products.
 We have also sought to provide lenders with clear standards that, without being overly prescriptive, preserve access to responsible credit for qualified borrowers.
 The proposal covers the entire subprime market, not just lenders supervised by the federal banking agencies, and focuses attention on the areas of greatest risk--while preserving consumers' access to responsible credit.
 The proposal addresses the extension of credit without consideration of a borrower's ability to repay, verification of income and assets relied upon to make a loan, prepayment penalties, and escrow accounts for taxes and insurance.
Legislative initiatives that would allow the Federal Housing Administration to increase its scale to reach a wider range of borrowers and develop appropriate underwriting and pricing methodologies to deal with any increased risk and another that would strengthen the oversight of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are important compliments to our regulatory efforts to strengthen the housing markets.
Another major outreach effort involves gathering information on the best practices for addressing community development issues and then disseminating that information through publications, meetings, and forums.
 Since January 2007, Community Affairs offices across the Federal Reserve System have sponsored or cosponsored more than 75 events related to foreclosures, reaching more than 5,800 lenders, counselors, community development specialists, policymakers, and others.
 Beginning next month, the Community Affairs function will host a series of System-wide forums in order to further examine the impact foreclosures have on neighborhoods in both weak and strong housing markets, as well as the tools available to address the  impacts of foreclosures.

The Federal Reserve continues to provide educational resources to help consumers make informed personal financial decisions, such as choosing the right mortgage.
  The Federal Reserve Banks, through their Community Affairs offices, are working to establish foreclosure-mitigation resources on their websites for use by municipalities, housing counselors, and community groups.
The Federal Reserve's most recent undertaking to address foreclosure issues is the partnership we are announcing today with NeighborWorks America.
 This new partnership not only leverages our ability to conduct data analysis, research, and outreach, it builds on our existing working relationship as one of the federal agencies represented on the NeighborWorks America board of directors.
 Together, the Federal Reserve and NeighborWorks America will develop and deploy resources, tools, strategies, and best practices for mitigating the impact of foreclosures across the country.
 After averaging about 1.7 percent starting in 1990 through 2006, the home-vacancy rate rose sharply in 2006 and hit 2.9 percent in the first quarter of 2008, according to the U.S.
 Research indicates that foreclosures tend to reduce the value of nearby properties; the magnitude of these price declines appears to differ, depending on the presence of variables such as the strength of the local housing market or the distance between a foreclosed home and other surrounding homes.4  Moreover, neighborhoods that have significant concentrations of vacant properties are not attractive to potential buyers, further challenging community-stabilization efforts.

Vacant homes also drain the coffers of municipalities, who must secure the homes from crime, keep them clear of trash, or in extreme cases, demolish them in order to maintain stability in the broader community.5  For example, the chief of regional development for the City of Cleveland estimates that the city will spend $65 million each year for five years to address costs related to abandoned properties.6  Not only are these costs high, they come at a time when tax revenues are generally decreasing because of declining home values.
 We have heard from many nonprofit community development organizations that foreclosures, and the impact on the neighborhoods affected by them, limit the organizations' ability to proactively engage in their previous development activities.
 As a member of the board of NeighborWorks America, I am keenly aware of the resources needed to deal with community stabilization in the wake of foreclosures.

 The properties are then rehabilitated and sold to owner-occupants, frequently with appraisal-gap subsidies provided by the city and federal resources.

 Working with NeighborWorks America, the Federal Reserve will develop training resources for nonprofits and local governments to foster their understanding of the foreclosure and REO process and to help them develop specific strategies for the sale and effective use of REO in individual markets.
The ultimate goal is to return REO to productive use, for example, to provide affordable rental housing or to supply new, sustainable homeownership opportunities in low- and moderate-income communities.
Research and analysis will play a key role in the success of local efforts.
 The Federal Reserve System is committed to providing NeighborWorks and others with timely reports and information so that foreclosure-mitigation resources can be effectively targeted to local areas.
 For example, the Federal Reserve may map mortgage-delinquency rates in specific metropolitan areas, to help local governments and nonprofits develop and prioritize their strategies for stabilizing communities.

As  demonstrated by our partnership with NeighborWorks America, the Federal Reserve System is committed to supporting sustainable, healthy communities.
 Bringing nonprofits, local government representatives, and financial market participants together to share information and develop best practices for addressing the negative impacts of foreclosures on neighborhoods is the next phase of this commitment.
 Leveraging the System's unique structure of Banks and Branches and NeighborWorks America's broad local presence will allow us to make our research and outreach broadly available to nonprofits and community leaders.
As the Federal Reserve builds on  its consumer protection efforts in order to mitigate foreclosures for current homeowners, we are also concerned about the impact current mortgage market problems are having on individual communities.
 The challenges of rising foreclosures are significant at the state and local level and the nature of the problem varies by location.
 Through its structure, the Federal Reserve System is attuned to local issues, which both informs its national policymaking and allows for responses tailored to local conditions.
 Our partnership with NeighborWorks America is an important part of that commitment.
 Kristopher Gerardi, Adam Hale Shapiro, and Paul Willen (2008), "Subprime Outcomes: Risky Mortgages, Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston.
  "Dynamic Maps of Nonprime Mortgage Conditions in the United States." Return to text
 Liz Laderman (March 2008), "The Efficacy of Mortgage Loan Workouts," Unpublished, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
 Chris Warren (March 5, 2008), "Presentation to Consumer Advisory Council of the Federal Reserve Board," City of Cleveland.

 I will also discuss some initiatives taken by the Federal Reserve to address the foreclosure crisis as well as other policies that might be used to strengthen mortgage and housing markets.
 The sharpest increases have been among subprime mortgages, particularly those with adjustable interest rates:  About one quarter of subprime adjustable-rate mortgages are currently 90 days or more delinquent or in foreclosure.1  Delinquency rates also have increased in the prime and near-prime segments of the mortgage market, although not nearly so much as in the subprime sector.
 As a consequence of rising delinquencies, foreclosure proceedings were initiated on some 1.5 million U.S.
homes during 2007, up 53 percent from 2006, and the rate of foreclosure starts looks likely to be yet higher in 2008.
 Investors, for example, are unlikely to want to hold onto a property whose value has depreciated significantly, and some borrowers--perhaps because they were put into an inappropriate loan or because personal circumstances have changed--cannot realistically sustain homeownership.
 However, if a foreclosure is preventable, and the borrower wants to stay in the home, the economic case for trying to avoid foreclosure is strong.
 Because foreclosures impose high costs, including legal and administrative costs as well as the costs of leaving the property vacant for a possibly extended period, both the borrower and the lender often are better off avoiding foreclosure.
 Moreover, it is important to recognize that the costs of foreclosure may extend well beyond those borne directly by the borrower and the lender.
 In the current environment, more-rapid declines in house prices may have an adverse impact on the broader economy and, through their effects on the valuation of mortgage-related assets, on the stability of the financial system.
 Thus, finding ways to avoid preventable foreclosures is a legitimate and important concern of public policy.
 However, another factor is now playing an increasing role in many markets:  declines in home values, which reduce homeowners' equity and may consequently affect their ability or incentive to make the financial sacrifices necessary to stay in their homes.
On the principle that a picture is worth a thousand words, Federal Reserve staff, using detailed, county-by-county information on mortgage performance, have developed a series of "heat maps," which summarize the incidence of serious mortgage delinquencies across the nation as well as some of the key drivers of loan performance.
 Lower values or changes (again, with the exception of that one map) are indicated by shades of green.
Nationally, as of the fourth quarter of 2007, the rate of serious delinquency, as measured by credit records, stood at 2 percent of all mortgage borrowers, up nearly 50 percent from the end of 2004.2   The fourth quarter of 2004 is a useful benchmark, because general economic conditions were fairly normal and the lax underwriting that emerged later was not yet evident.
 Again, we can use heat maps to examine the underlying relationships across geographic regions between changes in mortgage delinquency rates and factors identified as driving loan performance.
 For example, the change in the unemployment rate in a county can be used as a proxy for disruptions in family incomes and subsequent financial stress.
 Figure 4 shows changes in average annual unemployment rates across counties between 2004 and 2007, with counties indicated in red experiencing increases or only slight decreases in joblessness.3   The data suggest that increases in unemployment rates account for at least some of the recent increases in mortgage delinquencies.
 Parts of New England, states in the Great Lakes region--including Minnesota, Michigan, and Wisconsin--and a number of other states, such as Nevada, show both increased mortgage delinquencies and notable increases in unemployment rates.
However, the behavior of unemployment does not seem sufficient to explain the increased delinquency rates in other areas, including California, Florida, and portions of Colorado, where mortgage delinquencies increased during a period in which unemployment generally decreased.
 Another important determinant of loan performance, identified by research at the Federal Reserve and elsewhere, is changes in house prices.4   Figure 5 shows the regional pattern of changes in house prices between 2006 and 2007, with unchanged prices and price declines indicated in red.5   The figure shows that Florida, California, Nevada, Michigan, and parts of Arizona and Colorado experienced decreases in house prices between the fourth quarter of 2006 and the fourth quarter of 2007 (a pattern which has continued and intensified in 2008).6   As I noted, sharp declines in house prices, and thus in homeowners' equity, reduce both the ability and incentive of homeowners, particularly those under financial stress for other reasons, to retain their homes.
What are the implications of these relationships, particularly the linkage of mortgage payment problems and falling house prices?  Loan servicers are used to dealing with mortgage delinquencies related to life events such as unemployment or illness, with the most common approaches being a temporary repayment plan or the folding of missed payments into the principal balance.
 In some cases, when the source of the problem is a decline of the value of the home well below the mortgage's principal balance, the best solution may be a write-down of principal or other permanent modification of the loan by the servicer, perhaps combined with a refinancing by the Federal Housing Administration or another lender.
 To be effective, such programs must be tightly targeted to borrowers at the highest risk of foreclosure, as measured, for example, by debt-to-income ratio or by the extent to which the mortgage is "underwater."  Finding the right balance--particularly the need to avoid programs that give borrowers who can make their payments an incentive to default--is difficult.
I would like to say a few words about the Federal Reserve's efforts to strengthen homeownership and reduce preventable foreclosures.
 The Federal Reserve's decisions regarding monetary policy and our efforts to increase financial stability affect housing and mortgage markets, of course.
 But, as an organization with a national presence in the form of regional Federal Reserve Banks and their Branches, we are also working to address these issues more directly.
 We are collaborating with other regulators, community groups, policy organizations, lenders, and public officials to identify ways to prevent unnecessary foreclosures and their negative effects on local economies.
 First, we have employed economic research and analysis, a particular strength of the Federal Reserve, to increase the sum of knowledge about mortgage and housing issues.
 For example, we are providing community leaders with detailed analyses identifying neighborhoods at high risk of foreclosures, analogous to the heat maps I showed you this evening.9   These analyses have helped community organizations better focus their scarce resources, such as deciding where to target counseling services or other intervention efforts.
 A Federal Reserve System work group has prepared overviews of the current state of knowledge about housing and mortgage markets, and further research is currently under way to fill in the most important analytical gaps.
Second, we are collaborating with interested parties across the country, taking advantage of our national presence and our existing relationships with local lenders, community groups, government officials, and other stakeholders, to take practical steps to address the causes and consequences of foreclosures.
 To help address this problem, the Federal Reserve is joining in a partnership with the nonprofit NeighborWorks America to develop materials, tools, and training programs to help communities and others acquire and manage vacant properties.
 Federal Reserve Banks and Branches have also hosted numerous meetings and workshops to bring together local officials, lenders, community groups, and others to try to find ways to reduce the incidence of foreclosures and mitigate their economic and social effects.
 To this end, the Federal Reserve Board has proposed new regulations to better protect consumers from a range of unfair or deceptive mortgage lending and advertising practices.
 To help ensure that the rules are broadly enforced, we are engaging in a program with other federal and state agencies to conduct consumer compliance reviews of nondepository lenders and mortgage brokers.
The Federal Reserve also is continuing its long-standing practice of providing educational and information resources to help consumers make informed personal financial decisions, including choosing the right mortgage.
 Through their community affairs offices, Federal Reserve Banks are working to establish foreclosure-mitigation resource centers on their websites to be used by small municipalities, housing counselors, and community groups.
 For consumers who have questions about banking procedures and rules or who believe they may have been treated unfairly by their lender, the Federal Reserve Consumer Help Center directs queries to the various regulatory agencies so that a consumer has only one call to make to ask questions or file complaints.10   
 The Congress can take an important step by moving quickly to reconcile and enact legislation permitting the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) to increase its scale and improve its management of risks.
 Such legislation could help the FHA reach a wider range of borrowers and develop appropriate underwriting and pricing methodologies to deal with any increase in credit risk.

 Recently, the Congress expanded Fannie Mae's and Freddie Mac's role in the mortgage market by temporarily increasing the limits on the sizes of the mortgages they can accept for securitization.
 In addition, because the GSEs have resolved some of their accounting and operational problems, their federal regulator, the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight, has lifted some of the constraints that it had imposed on them.
As the GSEs expand their role in housing markets, the Congress should move forward on GSE reform legislation, which includes strengthening the regulatory oversight of these companies.
 As the Federal Reserve has testified on many occasions, it is very important for the health and stability of our housing finance system that the Congress provide the GSE regulator with broad authority to set capital standards, establish a clear and credible receivership process, and define and monitor a transparent public purpose--one that transcends just shareholder interests--for the accumulation of assets held in their portfolios.
Most Americans are paying their mortgages on time and are not at risk of foreclosure.
 Therefore, doing what we can to avoid preventable foreclosures is not just in the interest of lenders and borrowers.
 "The 2006 HMDA Data (1.26 MB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol.
 This information from TrenData is drawn from the credit records of a geographically stratified random sample of more than 20 million individuals (roughly a 1 in 10 sample of all credit records) for each calendar quarter beginning in 1992.
 Unemployment rate data are from the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
 Displayed is the annual percentage change in the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight price index for each county from the end of 2006 to the end of 2007.
 The index compiled by the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight uses the values of homes whose mortgages were purchased by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac.
 HMDA is implemented by Regulation C (12 CFR 203) of the Federal Reserve Board.

At the Community Reinvestment Fund First Annual Forum, Minneapolis, Minnesota
I am pleased to address the inaugural Community Reinvestment Fund (CRF) Annual Community Forum Series.
The development of sustainable capital sources through innovation is an important goal for the Community Development Financial Institutions (CDFI) industry.
Today's host, CRF, has played a pioneering role in the development of a secondary market for community development loans, a topic I spoke on more than a year and a half ago in Washington, D.C.
The turmoil in the subprime mortgage market, in particular, has affected liquidity of the larger secondary markets.
There is a striking parallel with the challenges for the re-emergence of the subprime mortgage market and the adoption of innovations in the community development investments market.
To overcome the unease of the current financial markets and attract a new source of capital, new market entrants must make particular efforts to reduce the uncertainty associated with their investment opportunities.
For the CDFI industry, the challenges that need to be addressed are improving information about these products, developing models of risk and pricing, and standardizing these contracts.
The Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) was enacted more than 30 years ago in response to deteriorating economic conditions in urban areas, particularly in lower-income and minority communities.
The CRA served as a catalyst in attracting innovative public and private investment capital into low- and moderate-income communities.
Consider the following: In 1991, 2,000 community development corporations (CDCs) built 300,000 units and 17 million square feet of commercial space.
The CRF has issued three rated securities within the past six years totaling almost $200 million, opening the door to institutional investors and expanding the marketplace.
The migration toward sustainable mainstream capital sources is important in light of budgetary challenges facing governmental and philanthropic funding sources.
Accessing the broad depth of the capital markets as a self-sustaining funding source for community development would yield enhanced benefits, such as more-efficient delivery of capital, greater funding and underwriting discipline, and reduced finance costs.
Of course, a real challenge is building a bridge between the two very different worlds of capital markets and community development.
The former requires strict market discipline, a rich set of data to assess risk and pricing, and standardization.
The latter, community development, however, has a commitment to individuals and communities that have been left out of the economic mainstream and uses products tailored to their unique circumstances.
Importance of Data for New Products and Proper Risk Modeling
When a new product is being developed, there is an initial experimentation phase in which market participants learn a great deal about the product's performance and risk characteristics.
This phase involves gathering and processing information and modeling the performance of the product in various scenarios and under different market conditions.
It may then take time for market participants to understand what, exactly, they need to know to value a product.
In the initial experimentation phase, the terms and characteristics of a new product are adjusted in response to market acceptance--or lack thereof.
During this period, market participants are seeking and providing information so that they can properly value the product, judge its potential for risk and return, assess its market acceptance and liquidity, and determine the extent to which the risks of the product can be hedged or mitigated.
To do this, market participants must perform due diligence, a process to gather and assess relevant sources of information to evaluate that product.
Due diligence is critical because market participants must trust but verify the market-provided information.
Potential purchasers, for example, might engage in various activities, ranging from assessing risk exposures through stress testing to assessing the enforceability of contracts that define the requirements of investors, trustees, guarantors, and originators.
We have recently seen how a lack of information and insufficient due diligence have created problems in the market for subprime residential mortgage-backed securities.
Instead, they may have simply accepted or trusted credit ratings as a substitute for their own risk analysis, and not verified enough.
Lack of information, a stressed financial environment, and disparate contract obligations led to a general lack of liquidity in the subprime market, which later spread to the broader market for mortgage securities.
In the early 1990s, for example, participants engaged in the collateralized mortgage obligation (CMO) market and in certain types of interest rate derivatives that did not have adequate information about the potential volatility and prepayment risk involved.
Consequently, market participants did not appropriately model these risks and suffered significant losses when market interest rates rose sharply in the mid-1990s.
As in the case of today's market for residential mortgage-backed securities, the general market reaction was a flight away from these instruments.
However, over time, the market was restored as market participants came to better understand the risks and as standardized methods were developed to measure the risks and model the value of these instruments under alternative scenarios.
Increased information and standardized pricing conventions, such as the use of option-adjusted spreads, moved these instruments from the experimentation and learning phase to broad market acceptance.
When market participants realize that they do not have the information necessary for proper valuation of risks, market liquidity can become impaired, such as in the CMO market in the 1990s and in the subprime market recently.
Second, investments will need to be made to warehouse and model data related to these instruments, which will enhance the understanding of risks, particularly under stress conditions.
Third, investments in human capital expertise--that is, in people so that they can better understand, interpret, and act appropriately on the results of the modeling and analysis of the information gathered--will also need to be made.
For innovations in the community development investment markets, it will also likely take time for these markets to mature because of the time and cost to systematically collect data and for investors to understand these new instruments.
First, how will the CDFI industry organize itself to generate and collect this data? Second, who is poised to lead efforts in setting standards for industry data? Finally, who and how will the intellectual capital be developed to model and structure these new instruments? There should also be consideration of existing standards from established products that parallel developing ones, such as the adoption of best practices for both mortgage securitizations and community development securitizations.
I do want to acknowledge that there have been many notable accomplishments in pioneering community development investments.
For example, there is a growing secondary market for community development loans; community development venture capital has grown 100 percent since 2002 to more than $800 million in assets under management in 2004; since 2002, the New Markets Tax Credit Program has issued $16 billion in allocations, with a growing sophisticated market for investments and trading of the tax credit equity.
I am pleased that the Federal Reserve Banks have played an active role as a convener on these topics and in the dissemination of best practices and policy.
I enjoyed sharing my thoughts on the topic of the development of the secondary markets for community development loans at a forum that was hosted last year by the Board of Governors and the Federal Reserve Banks of San Francisco and New York.
For these markets to grow significantly, however, there must be continued dialogue and exchange between market participants to collect these data uniformly from the beginning to the culmination of these deals so that performance data are captured.
For example, the recovery of the CMO market was aided by improved information and modeling, which increased confidence, especially as products became increasingly standardized.
Standardization in the terms and in the contractual rights and obligations of purchasers and sellers of the product reduces, but does not eliminate, the need for market participants to engage in extensive efforts to obtain information and reduces the need to verify the information that is provided in the market through due diligence.
Reduced information costs, in turn, lower transaction costs, thereby facilitating price discovery and enhancing market liquidity.
Also, standardization can reduce legal risks because litigation over contract terms can result in case law that applies to similar situations, thus reducing uncertainty.
The benefits of the development of standardization for enhancing the liquidity of financial markets have a long history.
The standardization of the futures markets improved the flow of information to market participants, reducing transaction costs and fostering the emergence of liquid markets.2
In the mid-1850s, the market for grain did not enjoy the very deep liquidity we see in today's market.
To create a liquid market for grain trading, buyers and sellers of grain needed a way of systematically analyzing the different kinds of grain that came into the exchange from different sources.
In other words, the market needed a way to "grade the grain." The market created special silos that combined grain from a number of sources.
The Board of Trade established minimum quality standards based on the need for market participants to evaluate the reliability of promises of future deliveries of grain to the buyer.
In 1865, the Chicago Board of Trade standardized the delivery dates for the contracts, thus fostering the emergence of liquid markets in which traders could readily hedge the risk of price changes in the commodities and contracts.
This example of how standardization helped jump-start a marketplace may provide insights regarding the current challenges in the subprime markets as well as the development of the community development investment market.
As of January 2008, the most recent month for which data are available, about 24 percent of subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) were 90 or more days delinquent, twice the level one year earlier.3 Roughly 190,000 foreclosures were started on these mortgages in the fourth quarter, up 11 percent from the previous quarter.4 The cost of foreclosures is high for lenders, investors, communities and causes severe disruption and distress to individuals and families.
With the continuing high rates of foreclosure and the high costs associated with foreclosures, it is in the interest of lenders, investors, and borrowers to develop prudent loan modification programs to help borrowers on a larger scale and at sustainable levels.
Efforts to streamline or standardize the loan modification process could lower transaction costs, provide timely relief for distressed borrowers, and reduce uncertainties in the market for subprime mortgage-backed securities.
The Board has also sought to ensure clear lending standards through stricter regulations prohibiting abusive and deceptive practices in the mortgage market under the authority of the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA).
Under HOEPA, the Board is considering changes that would stem abusive practices by addressing the following: a requirement to assess repayment ability, a requirement to escrow taxes and insurance, a ban on prepayment penalties in certain circumstances, a prohibition on a lender paying a broker more than the consumer had expressly agreed that the broker would receive, and a ban on specific advertising practices deemed unfair or deceptive.
Clarifying lending standards will increase investor confidence in the mortgage market and help to revive the flow of credit to consumers, particularly those with shorter or weaker credit histories.
These lessons learned from standardization challenges facing the subprime market may be helpful as the community development industry considers ways to reduce uncertainty to enhance the attractiveness of CDFI investments.
Over-the-counter derivative products are multifaceted and designed to be customized to the unique needs of market participants.
To standardize these products, while maintaining their unique features, the International Swaps and Derivatives Association created a master agreement that not only provided standard definitions and a general outline for the contract, but also provided latitude to include customized terms.
Ultimately, the standardization provided by the master agreement reduces uncertainty about the instruments, lowers transaction costs, and facilitates price discovery and market liquidity.
Similarly, the community development investments field may consider the benefits of standardizing some type of master agreement that captures key structural provisions and that incorporates the flexibility to include customized terms of the underlying transactions.
To achieve a more dynamic marketplace for community development investments, the CDFI industry should continue to dialogue and to strengthen bridges with mainstream financial market participants.
To reduce uncertainty around community development investments, the CDFI industry must collect and provide uniform data so that appropriate risk and pricing models can be developed and must also make efforts to standardize these contracts.
Conversely, capital providers must strengthen working relationships with the CDFI industry to develop a richer understanding of the finance activities and unique risks and strengths of these investment opportunities.
As these two seemingly disparate worlds of the capital markets and the community development industry address these challenges together, a powerful source of sustainable private capital can be tapped to fund an equally powerful spectrum of community investments.
I am confident that the expertise and dedication found in the community development industry can move the industry in the right direction to address these obstacles as well as to expand the flow of capital to low- and moderate-income communities and individuals.
Kroszner (2007), "Innovation, Information, and Regulation in Financial Markets," speech delivered at the Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum, Philadelphia, November 30.

The Changing Business of Banking: Implications for Financial Stability and Lessons from Recent Market Turmoil
At the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond's Credit Market Symposium, Charlotte, North Carolina
The recent market turmoil certainly has underscored how banking and financial intermediation have been changing, and it has taught some important lessons about the implications for financial stability that I don't believe were previously well understood.
Commercial banks and other financial market participants need to incorporate those lessons into their risk-management practices.
Bank supervisors need to encourage and monitor banks' efforts to strengthen their practices and we need to consider how regulatory and supervisory policies should be modified to reinforce incentives for sound practices.
Finally, changes in the ways savings are channeled to borrowers have also affected the role of the nonbank sector.
Central banks and other policymakers need to think carefully about the implications of these changes for financial stability and the appropriate prudential regulation of nonbank financial institutions.1
Even before the recent market turmoil, it was abundantly clear that the business of banking has changed quite significantly over the past several decades.
The primary impetus for change has been intensified competitive pressures from the securities markets.
Changes in technology (for example, the development and expansion of credit-scoring techniques) have allowed a larger share of credit extensions to households and businesses to be packaged in securities and sold to entities that often can fund the securities more cheaply than banks can fund loans.
Nonmortgage consumer credit (credit card and installment debt) began to be securitized in the late 1980s, and in recent years more than 20 percent of the outstanding stock has been securitized.
Until the summer of 2007, there was very strong demand for securitized credit from mutual funds, pension funds, and other institutional investors.
Throughout that period, household wealth was rising rapidly, and, directly or indirectly, households were allocating an increasing share of their wealth to vehicles that were managed or advised by professional asset managers.
At the same time, advances in the technology of modeling, pricing, and trading of risk over the past several decades gave added impetus to the migration of credit to securities markets.
Competition from the securities market has significantly affected all segments of banking, but the most dramatic changes have occurred at the very largest banks.
One could say that their strategic response was, "If you can't beat them, join them." Freed from the constraints of the Glass-Steagall Act by incremental regulatory changes that were expanded and codified in the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act of 1999, the very largest banking organizations have significantly increased their capital markets businesses, including arranging and underwriting securitizations, securities custody, prime brokerage, and both over-the-counter and exchange-traded derivatives.
They have also made significant inroads into both traditional asset management and the management of hedge funds.
Indeed, the largest commercial banks are now major competitors in many of the business lines that were historically viewed as the province of investment banks.
Together, the very large commercial and investment banks have become indispensable to the efficiency and stability of the securities markets.
For example, the $2 trillion hedge fund sector is critically dependent on a relatively small number of commercial and investment banks that serve as secured creditors and derivatives counterparties.
And, as the financial market turmoil has revealed, banks provide liquidity support to various short-term financial markets, including the commercial paper market and markets for various types of tax-exempt debt.
Competition from securities markets has also affected smaller banks significantly, though less dramatically than larger banks.
Setting aside the 100 largest banks, the share of commercial real estate loans in bank loan portfolios nearly doubled over the past 10 years and is approaching 50 percent.
The portfolio share at these banks of residential mortgage and other consumer loans, which are more readily securitized, fell by 20 percentage points over the same period.
The Implications for Financial Stability from the Recent Market Turmoil
The changing business of the largest commercial banks means that threats to financial stability do not necessarily come from traditional sources such as a deposit run or a deterioration in a bank's portfolio of business loans.
The largest banks' capital markets businesses have given rise to new threats to financial stability.
These threats stem from banks' securitization activity, from the complexity of banks' capital markets activity, and from the services that banks provide to the asset-management industry, including hedge funds.
And risks that are more traditional to banking, such as liquidity risk and concentration risk, have appeared in new forms.
The securitization activity of the largest banks is often described as following an originate-to-distribute model.
However, in the recent market turmoil, problems arose at both ends of the originate-to-distribute chain as it was being applied to subprime mortgages.
The quality of subprime origination declined because of a serious erosion in underwriting standards at banks and especially at nonbanks.
As loan amounts rose relative to the value of properties, the performance of the subprime mortgage sector as a whole became sensitive to even small declines in house prices, with the distressing results that we have seen since house price growth decelerated beginning in 2006.
A similar decline in underwriting standards occurred in other market segments, such as the market for leveraged loans, where banks increasingly originated loans with less-stringent covenants through the first half of last year.
More generally, insufficient appreciation that economic conditions might not always be benign and that trading conditions in markets might not always be highly liquid led to an underpricing of both credit and liquidity risks.
At the other end of the originate-to-distribute chain, a good part of the risk associated with the securitization of subprime mortgages was not distributed into the market but was retained by banks.
Super senior CDO tranches--the last to bear the costs of defaults on the underlying mortgages--were considered to be extremely safe investments, and little of the risk of these instruments was truly distributed into the market.
First, underwriters sold some of the risk to off-balance-sheet vehicles, but they also provided explicit or implicit liquidity backstops to the vehicles.
Much of this risk came back onto banks' balance sheets when liquidity pressures emerged in the second half of last year.
Second, underwriters chose to retain some of the super senior exposure, in some cases reportedly because they met some resistance when they attempted to sell them at very slim spreads.
The underwriters evidently misjudged the risk of those positions, in some cases because they relied too heavily on external triple-A ratings.
Third, underwriters hedged some of the risk with monoline financial guarantors.
But some of the guarantors took on so much subprime-related risk that their financial condition had become highly correlated with the performance of the subprime mortgage sector, which has called into question the effectiveness of those hedges.
As I mentioned earlier, the growth of securitization is in large part a response to the growing demands of institutional investors for fixed-income securities.
I see three possibilities: First, they underestimated the potential for a nationwide decline in house prices; second, they relied on credit-rating agency analyses that have proven to be inadequate; or third, they simply misunderstood the risk of these often very complex securities.
The complexity of CDOs is one example of a widespread increase in the complexity of the capital market activities in which the largest banks now engage.
Some banks' failure to adequately manage this complexity has weakened financial stability in the current market turmoil.
CDOs and other structured credit products can be very complicated.
Securities pools reduce idiosyncratic risk--the potential for problems particular to individual borrowers to have a material effect on overall values--but they are quite subject to systematic risk from broad-based macroeconomic developments that affect all loans at the same time.
As I noted earlier, some banks that chose to hold super senior CDO securities did so because they trusted in an external triple-A credit rating.
Because some banks did not fully understand all aspects of these exposures, once the risks crystallized last year in a weak house price environment, compounded by widespread liquidity pressures in many markets, banks had to scramble to measure and hedge these risks.
Another aspect of the changing business of banking with possible implications for financial stability is the growth of services that banks provide, including running their own asset-management businesses and providing prime brokerage services to hedge funds.
Banks with asset-management businesses must manage the reputation risk that such businesses entail.
Because institutional investors are naturally sensitive to the reputation of their asset managers, losses elsewhere in the bank can be compounded if they leave the bank's asset-management business exposed to a flight of business and a sharp reduction in fee income.
An increase in the business that banks do with highly leveraged investors, like some hedge funds, leads to an increase in the attention that banks must pay to counterparty risk management.
Liquidity risk is a familiar risk to banks, but it has appeared in somewhat new forms recently.
While the originate-to-distribute model aims to move exposures off of banks' balance sheets, the risk remains that a sudden closing of securitization markets can force a bank to hold and fund exposures that it had originated with the intent to distribute.
And in many cases when banks did distribute exposures, they did so to various off-balance-sheet financing vehicles in which they retained contractual and reputational liquidity exposures.
These vehicles, like banks themselves, were funding longer-term assets with short-term liabilities, and, like banks, they were subject to a run when their lenders became concerned about the quality of the assets.
Some banks wound up using their own liquidity to support financing vehicles that were no longer able to fund themselves on anything like the same terms and conditions as before the market turmoil began.
And as banks made good on the implicit or explicit liquidity insurance they sold, they found themselves with larger balance sheets and less-robust capital cushions than they anticipated.
As the banks' capital and liquidity cushions unexpectedly eroded, they became quite cautious about extending credit, a dramatic change from the more complacent attitudes of previous years.
Concentration risk is another familiar risk that is appearing in a new form.
Banks have always had to worry about lending too much to one borrower, one industry, or one geographic region.
But as smaller banks hold more of their balance sheet in types of loans that are difficult to securitize, concentration risks can develop.
This has the potential to make the banking sector much more sensitive to a downturn in the commercial real estate market.
To protect their capital and liquidity, banks and other financial market participants are addressing the weaknesses revealed by market developments by becoming much more careful about the risks they are taking.
This is a necessary process, but it has been a difficult one as well; it is reducing the values of some assets and tightening credit cost and availability across a wide range of instruments and counterparties, despite considerable easing in the stance of monetary policy.
It is this tightening that is accentuating the downside risks for the economy as a whole.
And in some sectors, as lenders seek protection against perceived downside risks, it is probably going further than is necessary to foster financial stability in the long run.
For banks, a safer and more robust financial system will be characterized by improved risk management that incorporates the lessons from the recent turmoil.
Successful risk management looks comprehensively across business lines and is fully integrated into the decisionmaking of senior management.
Banks' own self-interest clearly provides a strong incentive to improve risk management, but better risk management at the largest banks would benefit the broader financial system, too.
A more resilient financial system will also require banks to strengthen all aspects of the originate-to-distribute model.
And they need to ensure that when they distribute risks into the market with securitization, the risks really are distributed and will not come back onto their balance sheet later.
If the credits end up in off-balance-sheet entities, banks need to pay more attention to the capital and liquidity impact of any residual claim these entities may have on the banks, even where that claim may arise through a desire to protect the bank's reputation rather than through any contractual obligation.
The structured credit products that are part of a safer banking system are likely to be simpler and more transparent.
Banks and investors must devote more effort to due diligence when investing in structured products, and they must avoid relying so heavily on credit rating agencies to do all their homework for them.
Banks must continue to focus on improving their management of counterparty risks.
During the financial market disruptions surrounding the hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management almost 10 years ago, counterparty risk was a central concern.
Subsequently, a private-sector group called the Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group developed a set of best practices for counterparty risk that greatly helped to set the tone for the needed improvements.
However, banks do not appear to have followed those best practices for their counterparty relationships with monoline financial guarantors, where counterparty risk has crystallized into large losses.
Banks must come to grips with the implications that their capital markets businesses have for liquidity risk management.
While securitization can transform illiquid assets into more-liquid securities, risk managers must be more aware of the ways that securitization can become a drain on a bank's liquidity position in times of stress.
Smaller banks, too, need to improve aspects of their risk management.
They should take steps to manage any portfolio concentrations that may arise because competition from securitization is less intense in certain market segments.
When they do increase the share of their portfolio in a given market segment above historical levels, they must ensure that their risk-management processes and controls are commensurate with the level and complexity of their exposures.
All banks--large and small--need to consider whether they need greater capital cushions.
The largest banks should consider whether their changing business model means that they need to hold more capital against some of the newer risks I discussed earlier.
Smaller banks must make sure their capital is sufficient to protect against the risk associated with the greater concentrations that have seemed to accompany the increased competition from securities markets.
Banks might find the current circumstances to be especially favorable for raising new capital.
Not only would more capital provide a cushion against the sorts of unexpected declines in creditworthiness and asset values that have marked recent months, it would also position banks well for expansion.
The safer, more resilient financial system that will emerge from this episode is likely to be characterized by a greater reliance on bank financing, as borrowers and lenders take on board the weaknesses that have become evident in securities markets.
For banks with plenty of capital, that adjustment process is likely to present a chance to pick up business that, appropriately managed, will prove quite profitable over time.
At the Federal Reserve and at other bank regulatory agencies, our job is to reinforce the incentives and actions that are building a more resilient financial system.
We need to make sure that regulatory minimum capital requirements and liquidity management plans protect reasonably well against shocks becoming systemic.
Our supervisory guidance needs to be in place to prevent backsliding when, over the coming years, the memories and lessons of the current market turmoil fade, as they certainly will.
To these ends, we are reexamining a host of things ranging from Basel II to liquidity to transparency.
Working with our domestic and international colleagues, we are looking to raise the Basel II capital requirements on specific exposures that have been troublesome, such as super senior CDOs of asset-backed securities and off-balance-sheet commitments.
We are looking to the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision to update its guidance on liquidity management in light of the recent experience.
And we and our supervisory colleagues are looking to require better disclosures of off-balance-sheet commitments and of valuations of complex structured products.
In the past, commercial banks and securities markets could be considered as separate channels for credit intermediation.
One important implication of this was that if one channel for credit provision became impaired, the other would usually be functioning and able to insulate, to a degree, overall credit provision and the economy from financial sector shocks.
For example, when the depository credit channel became impaired in the late 1980s and early 1990s, many borrowers were able to turn to liquid securities markets to meet a substantial portion of their needs for credit.
First, securities markets have become so large that commercial banks simply lack sufficient capital and balance sheet capacity to readily fill the gap when markets are impaired.
We saw this initially in mortgage markets when the securitization of nonconforming mortgages seized up; banks stepped up to make more jumbo prime mortgages and hold them on their books, but the cost of such credit rose substantially, and the amount of lending was reduced.
Second, banks themselves are more dependent on well-functioning securities markets, and as that dependence and the important role of banks as ultimate providers of funding to those markets became clearer, pressures on banks mounted.
So, in August, the turmoil crossed into the banking system when banks were challenged to backstop asset-backed commercial paper conduits and structured investment vehicles; under these circumstances, they were no longer comfortable fulfilling their traditional lending roles, and they tightened lending terms substantially, becoming part of the problem of credit availability, rather than a solution to it.
In our more security-oriented intermediation systems, both commercial banks and security markets seem to be critical to the stability of the financial system and the economy.
Third, large commercial banks and investment banks have increasingly similar risk profiles, so that all are subject to the same risk-management challenges under the same circumstances.
As the activities and risk profiles of large banks and securities firms have become increasingly similar, and as financial intermediation has run more through securities markets, we've certainly learned in the past month or so that it is not only commercial banks that can threaten financial stability.
So we must worry about excessive leverage and susceptibility to runs not only at banks but also at securities firms.
To be sure, investment banks are still different in many ways from commercial banks.
But we learned that short-term securities markets can suddenly seize up because of a loss of investor confidence, such as in the unusual circumstances building over the past six months or so.
And investment banks had no safety net to discourage runs or to fall back on if runs occurred.
Securities firms have been traditionally managed to a standard of surviving for one year without access to unsecured funding.
The recent market turmoil has taught us that this is not adequate, because short-term secured funding, which these firms heavily rely upon, also can become impaired.
With many securities markets not functioning well, with the funding of investment banks threatened, and with commercial banks unable and unwilling to fill the gap, the Federal Reserve exercised emergency powers to extend the liquidity safety net of the discount window to the primary dealers.3 Our goal was to forestall substantial damage to the financial markets and the economy.
Given the changes to financial markets and banking that we've been discussing this morning, a pressing public policy issue is what kind of liquidity backstop the central bank ought to supply to these institutions.
And, assuming that some backstop is considered necessary because under some circumstances a run on an investment bank can threaten financial and economic stability, an associated issue is what sorts of regulations are required to make the financial system more resilient and to avoid excessive reliance on any such facility and the erosion of private-sector discipline.
It is evident that the balance of market discipline and regulation is in the process of being adjusted to the reality of how our financial system has evolved.
But we need to make adjustments in such a way as to preserve the benefits of highly innovative financial markets where many advances have enabled risks to be better diversified and credit more readily available to more people.
Whatever type of backstop is put in place, in my view greater regulatory attention will need to be devoted to the liquidity risk-management policies and practices of major investment banks.
In particular, these firms will need to have robust contingency plans for situations in which their access to short-term secured funding also becomes impaired.
Because those longer-term funding sources will tend to be more costly, both investment banks and commercial banks are likely to conclude that it is more profitable to operate with less leverage than heretofore.
No doubt their internalization of the costs of potential liquidity shocks will be costly to their shareholders, and a portion of the costs likely will be passed on to other borrowers and lenders.
But a financial system with less leverage at its core will be a more stable and resilient system, and recent experience has driven home the very real costs of financial instability.
Bernanke (2008), "Addressing Weaknesses in the Global Financial Markets: The Report of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets," speech delivered at the World Affairs Council of Greater Richmond's Virginia Global Ambassador Award Luncheon, Richmond, Va., April 10.
Primary dealers are banks and securities broker-dealers that trade in U.S.
government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
On behalf of the Federal Reserve System, the New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy.

Financial Market Turmoil and the Federal Reserve: The Plot Thickens
At the New York University School of Law Global Economic Policy Forum, New York, New York
Thank you to the New York University School of Law for inviting me to participate in today's Global Economic Policy Forum.1
A little more than a year ago, I began to recount a story--already long-in-the-making--of the transformation of financial institutions driven by abundant liquidity in global financial markets.2 In those early chapters, one could not help but worry about the inherent risks to financial markets and the economy when the gloss of confidence wears thin, causing me to wonder aloud: "What happens when liquidity falters?"3 Let me briefly try to recount this tale over the last few quarters before offering some rough plot lines from which the balance of the story can be divined.
The sleepy complacency of a bygone era seemed rudely interrupted by a liquidity shock last August.4 A global margin call on virtually all leveraged positions began.
As you know, the Federal Reserve found it necessary to begin to exercise its monetary muscles in unprecedented ways.
New structured products and old financial institutions evidenced increasing signs of weakness.
Some central banks, including the Federal Reserve, helped supply liquidity to where it was most in need.
Financial market turmoil, partly as a result, was periodically placed in abeyance.
Casualties of the liquidity contraction nonetheless appeared; some remained in the narrative for awhile, others were removed with great dispatch.
Central banks, while generally more comfortable remaining behind the scenes, took center stage with new tools and policy prescriptions.
Many private market participants receded to the shadows of the stage, some anxiously anticipating intermission.
What some originally read as a short story punctuated by a liquidity shock evolved into a longer narrative.
Credit is threatening to displace liquidity as the primary antagonist.
A credit crunch, particularly for small businesses and consumers, poses meaningful downside risks to the real economy.
And market participants are struggling to assess the possibility that the narrative turns into a multi-act, macroeconomic drama.
First, a striking loss of confidence is affecting financial market functioning.
Second, the business models of many large financial institutions are in the process of significant re-examination and repair.
Third, the Federal Reserve is exercising its powers to mitigate the effects of financial turmoil on the real economy.
This third plot line, however necessary, will not, in and of itself, ensure a more durable return of trust to our financial architecture.
In my view, public liquidity is an imperfect substitute for private liquidity.
That is, only when the other plot lines advance apace--meaning that significant, private financial actors return to their proper role at center stage--will credit market functioning and support for economic growth be fully restored.
And for that to happen, as I am confident it will, we will find that the financial markets and financial firms are outfitted quite differently.
Liquidity expands with confidence in the efficacy of our financial architecture.
When information, securities, markets, and institutions work in a seamless fashion to intermediate the flow of funds between investors and borrowers, liquidity flourishes.
When the confidence in the financial architecture is meaningfully impaired, liquidity flounders.
A couple of examples highlight the dramatic change in liquidity that is gripping financial markets.
Recall the explosive growth in securitization markets in recent years.5 The loss in confidence in structured products was first evidenced last year in securities backed by subprime mortgages.
Actual and projected credit losses began to mount across many housing-related assets.6 Participants also lost confidence in the value provided through the securitization process itself.
Yields on non-agency mortgage-backed securities and commercial mortgage-backed securities skyrocketed; and, in some cases, securitization markets simply shut down.
Investors and financial institutions became complacent in their abilities--and the ability of credit rating agencies--to evaluate credit risks of complex structured products.
Even many large, sophisticated financial institutions chose to retain super senior and AAA-rated tranches for their own accounts.
In so doing, they systematically erred in assessing the assets' risk profile.
Moreover, these products--born in times of massive liquidity--were often not well designed to ensure efficient workout arrangements should the abundant pools of liquidity retreat or should unexpected defaults emerge.
Many financial products, such as asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP), auction rate securities (ARS), interbank funding products, and repurchase agreements (RPs), were intended to be steady, supportive credit facilitators in a liquidity-rich environment.
Credit quality concerns alone do not appear, even now, sufficiently widespread to induce the depth of problems witnessed in financial markets during the past several months.
Unclear disclosure by some financial institutions with respect to their off-balance-sheet commitments and liquidity support accentuated the uncertainty that is responsible for some of the poor market functioning.
More fundamentally, in my view, funding market disruptions reflect a striking decline in confidence in the financial architecture itself.
In short-term credit markets with minimal liquidity support, investors balk if they lose confidence in other investors' willingness to roll maturing paper.
Even when liquidity support exists, it may well prove insufficient to address market-wide concerns.
Many dealers of ARS, for example, withdrew their implicit liquidity support when failures became more frequent.
Even those ABCP programs purportedly with full explicit liquidity support were implicated in the turmoil.
So, I argue, the functioning of short-term credit markets is invariably tied to changes in confidence of our financial architecture--on the way up and on the way down.
Increasingly abundant confidence when things were advancing apace--unsustainably so, it turns out--gave rise to levels of liquidity that engendered complacency among investors and counterparties.
It was commonly believed that short-term, secured credit markets would perpetually remain open to finance high-quality assets.
And the notion of liquidity risk management was anachronistic, or so it seemed.
Market participants now seem to be questioning the financial architecture itself.
The fragility of short-term credit markets is a powerful manifestation of that loss of confidence.
The rise and fall of liquidity is not only changing fund flows in financial markets.
It may also be transforming the business models of financial institutions themselves--no matter their size, regulatory structure, peer group, funding status, or geography.
Of no less consequence, it drove a conflation of roles among commercial banks, investment banks, and asset managers.
The core functions of credit intermediation--creating, distributing, and owning risk--remained constant, but more institutions came to believe that there were inescapable synergies by operating across all three primary functions.
From 2002 to mid-2007, many large financial institutions did just that, and to great effect--creating products by aggregating and reconstituting assets, distributing bespoke risks across institutional and retail channels, and retaining certain preferred positions for proprietary accounts.
From the market's perspective, financial institutions overproduced goods and services that now have to be warehoused or liquidated.
From the perspective of financial institutions themselves, the old business models may be in the process of being upended.
And from the perspective of a dispassionate central banker, the contemporaneous changes in balance sheets and income statements by incumbent financial institutions--most notably, deleveraging and paring of business lines--are likely to prove highly consequential to the near-term outlook for the real economy.
Investment banks may reconfigure capital structures and core trading businesses to maximize benefits in a higher volatility environment.
Asset-gatherers, whether in the form of traditional money-management firms or hedge funds, that survive this time of testing may rely more on term funding and seek equity returns across beaten-down classes of structured and debt products.
Some curative steps by incumbent financial institutions are in the offing.
Financial institutions should continue to reassess their sources and uses of funding, their risk-management systems, risk tolerance, and human capital.
And, they should raise new capital to strengthen their balance sheets.
These actions, in my view, are important signs of strength, and will ensure that financial institutions thrive in the emerging financial architecture replete with new opportunities.
These actions will have concomitant benefits on real economic activity.
The central bank's responsibility is not to individual firms but to financial markets, and only then, to the extent that financial market stresses affect the real economy.
Given the fragility evidenced in financial markets, and the toll it is taking on real activity, the Federal Reserve agreed to take center stage.
This is a role for which we did not volunteer, but one in which we are prepared to serve.
The role has been thrust upon us by a loss of confidence in our existing financial architecture.
To prevent more serious financial fallout, the Fed established and expanded various lending facilities to depository institutions and primary dealers.7 Some facilities allow daily access to variable amounts of funding, and others provide access to a fixed amount of longer-term funding at pre-announced auction dates.
In the corporate bond market, risk spreads have narrowed a bit in recent weeks and measures of secondary-market functioning are improved.
More consequentially, we should recognize that Fed-supplied liquidity is a poor substitute for private-sector-supplied liquidity.
When liquidity flows among private-sector participants, the players can more judiciously assess risk and reward, more adroitly learn from the recent turmoil to strengthen the resiliency of credit intermediation, and more ably allocate capital to its most productive uses in the real economy.
Volatility is generally a friend, not a foe, of market functioning.
Only then, I suspect, will a more robust recovery in market liquidity, investor confidence, and real economic activity be achieved.
Of course, monetary policy continues to play an important role in the Federal Reserve's policy formulation.
We have reduced the policy target rate by a cumulative 3 percentage points since August.
These actions, together with significant actions to support liquidity, are intended to promote growth and mitigate downside risks to economic activity.
Consistent with our dual mandate of promoting maximum employment and stable prices, we also need to be alert to risks to price stability.
Increases in food and energy prices have pushed up overall consumer prices and are putting upward pressure on core inflation and inflation expectations.
And, more broadly, in my view, as financial intermediation channels reset, monetary policy will become still more efficacious.
Fed policy--both with respect to liquidity tools and monetary policy--is partially offsetting the consequences of the liquidity and credit pullback on real activity.
But we must be careful to not ask policy to do more than it is rightly capable of accomplishing.
Time is an oft-forgotten, yet equally essential, tool of our policy response.
Some believe the story of the current market turmoil began in August, and will end when the housing market stabilizes.
Financial institutions and other market participants grew increasingly dependent on the extraordinary liquidity around them.
When liquidity faltered, the weaknesses of the existing architecture abruptly revealed itself.
A new financial architecture, born of the forces of creative destruction, is early in the process of construction with the aid of the Federal Reserve and other public authorities.
But for the new paradigmatic architecture to be enduring, market-supplied liquidity must come to predominate.
To that end, I remain confident that financial institutions and financial markets will evolve to meet these challenges.
The opinions I express are my own and do not necessarily correspond with those of my colleagues in the Federal Reserve System.
Dan Covitz and Nellie Liang, of the Federal Reserve Board’s staff, provided valuable contributions to these remarks.
Kevin Warsh (2007), "Market Liquidity: Definitions and Implications," speech delivered at the Institute of International Bankers Annual Washington Conference, Washington, March 5, 2007.
Securitization volumes peaked in 2006, accounting for more than $1 trillion of net borrowing in U.S.
Kevin Warsh (2007), "Financial Market Developments," speech delivered at the State University of New York at Albany’s School of Business, Albany, N.Y., September 21, 2007.
In the housing-only version of the narrative, the establishment of a housing bottom is the sine qua non of an economic recovery.
In my remarks today, I maintain that reestablishing effective credit intermediation is critical to economic recovery.
Primary dealers are banks and securities broker-dealers that trade in U.S.
government securities with the Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
On behalf of the Federal Reserve System, the New York Fed's Open Market Desk engages in the trades to implement monetary policy.

Addressing Weaknesses in the Global Financial Markets: The Report of the President's Working Group on Financial Markets
At the World Affairs Council of Greater Richmond's Virginia Global Ambassador Award Luncheon, Richmond, Virginia
In recent months, the Federal Reserve has been intensely focused on the continuing strains in financial markets.
In particular, much experience shows that economies cannot perform at their full potential when financial conditions are such as to restrict the supply of credit to sound borrowers.
We are addressing these financial strains and their potential economic consequences with a number of tools, including the provision of extra liquidity to the system and reductions in our target for the federal funds rate.
Even as we have worked to resolve the current crisis, however, the Federal Reserve has also been part of a national and international effort to draw at least some preliminary conclusions about the sources of the current turmoil as well as the implications for public policy.
In my remarks today I will discuss some of these conclusions and, in the process, identify some measures that should be taken to strengthen the global financial system in light of the recent experience.
In the United States, policymakers' efforts to identify the sources of the financial turmoil and the appropriate public- and private-sector responses have been coordinated through the President's Working Group on Financial Markets (PWG), chaired by the Secretary of the Treasury.
The group's other principals include the heads of the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC), the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
With the support of the staff of the respective agencies, the PWG began to address these issues last fall, as the severity of the financial turmoil became increasingly apparent; in mid-March, we issued a brief statement outlining our tentative conclusions and policy recommendations.1 At the international level, the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), whose membership consists of central bankers, regulators, and finance ministers from many countries, including the United States, will also soon release a report on the causes of and potential responses to the turmoil.
I describe these policy development processes to underscore the cooperative nature of the enterprise, both among the U.S.
Given the global nature of our financial markets and institutions, international cooperation is essential to making the regulatory and supervisory structure more effective.
As I will discuss, many of our recommendations involve actions to be taken by market participants, and so their buy-in and cooperation is essential as well.
We have consulted extensively with market participants on these issues and will continue to do so.
As you may know, the Department of the Treasury recently issued a blueprint for regulatory reform in the United States.
The focus of the Treasury's work is on the appropriate design principles for our regulatory system--including the system's structure and governance, the appropriate scope of regulators' responsibilities, and how those responsibilities should be allocated across agencies--rather than on the specific issues raised by the current crisis.
In that respect, it is an important first step, and we look forward to working with the Congress and others in developing a framework that modernizes our financial and regulatory architecture.
Let me begin with the diagnosis of the causes of the crisis, focusing primarily on the U.S.
Although many factors played a role, to a considerable extent the current problems arose in the implementation of the so-called originate-to-distribute approach to credit extension.
The originate-to-distribute model breaks down the process of credit extension, from origination to the ultimate financing, into component parts, or stages, in a manner reminiscent of how contemporary manufacturers distribute the stages of production across firms and locations.
This approach has had considerable benefits, including increased access of small and medium-sized borrowers to the broader capital markets, but pitfalls in its implementation are now evident.
In the first stage of the process, the originator--a lender or a broker serving as a lender's agent--extends the mortgage loan to a potential homebuyer.
However, much more complex securities can also be created, backed for example by a mix of different types of loans or other assets combined with various guarantees or hedges; in recent years the issuance of these so-called structured credit products increased sharply.
Importantly, the newly created securities may be broken into pieces, or tranches, of varying seniority and credit quality.
In the third stage of the originate-to-distribute process, these tranches are rated separately by one or more credit rating agencies, then sold to investors with differing preferences for risk or retained by the lender.
In principle, the originate-to-distribute model spreads risk and reduces financing costs while affording borrowers greater access to capital.
The best-known and most serious case is that of subprime mortgages, mortgages extended to borrowers with weaker credit histories.
However, in the recent episode, some originators had little capital at stake, reducing their exposure to the risk that the loans would perform poorly.
Because subprime mortgages were frequently securitized, often as part of complex structured credit products, the losses associated with these delinquencies spread throughout the system.
Although subprime mortgages were the most obvious example, the loosening of credit standards and terms occurred more broadly, reflecting a general boom in credit markets that peaked and then reversed last summer.
This boom was characterized by a general erosion of market discipline, underpricing of risk, and insufficient attention by investors to the quality or riskiness of the instruments they purchased.
For example, in the market for so-called leveraged loans, used to finance mergers or buyouts, investors showed themselves willing to purchase debt with few covenants or other protections.
The PWG also concluded that investors often took insufficient care in evaluating the risks of structured credit products, in part because they over-relied on the evaluations provided by the credit rating agencies.
Unfortunately, the methodologies and assumptions the agencies used to rate many credit products proved faulty, and their data were inadequate (in part because of the lack of extensive experience with these products).
When rising delinquencies and losses on mortgages forced the agencies to sharply downgrade many structured credit products, investors lost confidence in those ratings and became unwilling to provide new funds.
Another factor that the PWG identified as contributing to the financial turmoil was weakness in the risk-management practices of large global financial institutions that created and held complex credit products.
As demonstrated by comparative studies of institutions' performance, which we at the Federal Reserve conducted in concert with regulators both in the United States and abroad, some firms fell short in identifying and managing the risks they were taking.
For example, some firms had not developed adequate capacity to measure their aggregate exposures to subprime credit risk across business lines, leaving them vulnerable to significant losses at the level of the entire firm.
Thus, the spreading of risk that was one of the supposed benefits of the originate-to-distribute model proved to be much less extensive than many believed.
The pullback of investors from structured credit products also imposed significant liquidity pressures on many of the largest financial institutions, which were left scrambling to fund instruments they could not sell or to meet contingent funding obligations for which they had not adequately planned.
The combination of unanticipated losses, which reduced capital, and severe liquidity pressures has significantly reduced the ability and willingness of some large financial institutions to extend fresh credit or to make markets, with adverse effects for the broader markets and for the economy.
The originate-to-distribute model thus broke down at a number of key points, including at the stages of underwriting, credit rating, and investor due diligence.
Financial institutions were caught, in some cases, by inadequate risk management and liquidity planning.
First, the weaknesses in the origination stage of the originate-to-distribute model must be corrected; no matter how elaborate and sophisticated, credit instruments can be no stronger than the underwriting that supports them.
Market participants will not easily forget the lessons of the recent period, and so market discipline will help in this respect.
But better consumer protections and disclosures, as well as greater supervisory scrutiny of the processes that originators follow and the incentives they face, are also needed.
In the mortgage area, the PWG recommended action at both the federal and state levels, including, for example, stronger nationwide licensing standards for mortgage brokers and more consistent government oversight for all originators.
In particular, the PWG recommended that the Federal Reserve use its authority to strengthen consumer protection rules and enhance required disclosures for mortgage originations.
Specifically, the Federal Reserve has used its authority under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act to propose and seek comment on new rules that, for higher-cost loans, would strengthen consumer protections.
To strengthen enforcement, we have initiated a pilot program to improve the coordination among federal and state authorities in the examination of nonbank mortgage lenders.
But more generally, investors must take responsibility for developing independent views of the risks of these instruments and not rely solely on credit ratings.
Improving the performance of the credit rating agencies is another key priority.
Beyond improving their methods, however, the credit rating agencies would serve investors better by providing greater transparency.
Credit rating agencies should, for example, publish sufficient information about the assumptions underlying their rating methodologies and models so that users can understand how a particular rating was determined.
It is also important for the credit rating agencies to clarify that a given rating applied to a structured credit product may have a different meaning than the same rating applied to a corporate bond or a municipal security.
Transparency about methods should also help to reduce concerns about conflicts of interest that might arise from the fact that issuers of securities pay the rating agencies for their work in rating those securities.
The credit rating agencies themselves clearly appreciate that concerns about the quality of ratings and potential conflicts of interest represent a fundamental challenge to their business model, and they have begun to address these issues.
The SEC, which has regulatory responsibility for the credit rating agencies, is conducting a broad review of issues regarding potential conflicts of interest at the rating agencies and is likely to identify further measures that should be implemented.
As I noted earlier, the turmoil in financial markets has also revealed significant weaknesses in the risk-management practices of some large, globally active financial institutions; these weaknesses have exacerbated the problems in the markets by compromising the abilities of these key firms to absorb risk and serve as intermediaries.
Prudential supervisors in the affected financial markets began joint work late last summer to identify common deficiencies on which they and the firms should focus.
The supervisors concluded that the firms that suffered the most significant losses tended to exhibit common problems, including insufficiently close monitoring of off-balance-sheet exposures, inadequate attention to the implications for the firm as a whole of risks taken in individual business lines, dependence on a narrow range of risk measures, deficiencies in liquidity planning, and inadequate attention to valuation issues.
To be sure, firms varied in the degree to which they were subject to these weaknesses, with better performance on these dimensions generally being reflected in better financial performance.
But prudential supervisors, including the Federal Reserve, must also review their existing policies and guidance to identify areas where changes could help firms strengthen their risk management--a process that is already under way.
Two areas of focus in this review will be capital and liquidity, the principal buffers that firms have against unexpected shocks.
Regulators should adopt policies that lead financial institutions to hold capital and liquidity cushions commensurate with their firm-wide exposures to adverse market events.
regulators, working together and through international groups such as the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, to enhance their guidance in a variety of areas in which weaknesses were identified.
I expect, for example, to see work forthcoming on liquidity risk management, concentration risk management, stress testing, governance of the risk-control framework, and management information systems.
Off-balance-sheet vehicles have been singled out for attention because of the pressures they have put on financial firms' capital and liquidity during the current episode.
The PWG made a number of recommendations on this topic, including urging regulators to require financial institutions to provide more detailed and comprehensive disclosures about off-balance-sheet commitments.
The PWG also recommended that the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) evaluate the need for further modifications to accounting standards related to consolidation and securitization, and that FASB and the International Accounting Standards Board achieve more rapid international convergence of accounting standards in this area.
Implementing these recommendations here in the United States, as well as working with our international partners to implement compatible and complementary measures abroad, will have many benefits.
Narrowly, these recommendations should help to improve and strengthen the originate-to-distribute model, which, despite recent problems, seems likely to remain an important component of our system of credit provision.
In the vision set forth by the PWG, however, this model will be rebuilt on a foundation that includes higher standards of underwriting and due diligence, a closer alignment of the incentives of originators and investors, greater transparency and simplicity in the design of credit instruments and in the determination of credit ratings, and better risk and liquidity management by financial institutions that develop and hold these instruments.
More broadly, these recommendations should moderate the likelihood and severity of future financial shocks and enable market participants to better withstand shocks when they occur.
Importantly, the PWG's approach relies on both market and regulatory discipline, not just one or the other.
With respect to market discipline, in light of recent experience, investors are unlikely to rely solely on credit ratings in the future but will instead require more and better information from originators and sponsors of credit products.
Credit rating agencies will also be tougher about the information they demand from securitizers, and I expect they will be more skeptical about especially complex and opaque instruments.
To support these efforts to strengthen market discipline, the PWG called for the private sector to establish several working groups to make recommendations concerning best practices in key areas.
Regulation complements market discipline--for example, by requiring disclosures that improve the ability of consumers to shop and of investors to evaluate risks, by providing protections to less-sophisticated market participants (such as subprime mortgage borrowers), and by requiring that financial institutions meet high standards in their management of risk.
We regulators must act to ensure that our policies and supervisory procedures are consistent with the objectives of improving the originate-to-distribute system and strengthening risk management more broadly.
We will review some aspects of our regulations and strengthen our supervisory guidance and disclosure requirements in key areas, such as those relating to securitizations and off-balance-sheet vehicles.
We will review our own use of credit ratings as a risk metric.
And we must be sure that we are working effectively with both the private sector and other domestic and international regulators to help the system function better.
The process of implementing the PWG's implementations will be challenging, in no small measure because of the continuing pressures of short-term crisis management.
Indeed, many of the necessary changes that have been identified, including increasing transparency, improving risk management, and attaining better coordination among regulators, could provide important support to the process of normalizing our financial markets.
President's Working Group on Financial Markets (2008), "Policy Statement on Financial Market Developments (1.36 MB PDF)," March.

At the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy and Federal Reserve Board Joint News Conference, Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C.
The financial preparedness of our nation's youth is essential to their well-being and of vital importance to our economic future.
In light of the problems that have arisen in the subprime mortgage market, we are reminded of how critically important it is for individuals to become financially literate at an early age so that they are better prepared to make decisions and navigate an increasingly complex financial marketplace.
Choosing a credit card, saving for retirement or for a child's education, or buying a home now requires more financial savvy than ever before.
I am personally convinced that improving education is vital to the future of our economy and all its citizens, and I strongly believe that promoting financial literacy, in particular, must be a high priority.
The Federal Reserve is strongly committed to Jump$tart's mission to better educate America's youth about personal finance.
 On the regional level, many Federal Reserve Banks work closely with the state coalitions to help achieve this worthy mission.
In fact, there is at least one economic education specialist at each of the Reserve Banks and their branches.
Many of these specialists offer training seminars to help educators teach vital economic and personal finance topics in their classrooms.
The Federal Reserve also continues to support a variety of programs and initiatives to increase financial literacy.
Money Smart Week, an annual week-long program coordinated by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, which educates consumers about money management and promotes financial education awareness in 20 cities across the 7th District;
Building Wealth, a resource developed by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas to help consumers develop a personal plan for building wealth;
"Life Smarts," a national quiz-based competition for high school students sponsored by the National Consumer League and promoted by many Reserve Banks;
Educational web sites, such as the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco's "FedVille," where students actively learn more about financial concepts such as spending, saving, and earning interest; and

In addition to these and many other Federal Reserve resources, we will continue to work to expand the resources and programs devoted to the important public policy challenge of improving financial literacy.

At the Dedication of the New Seattle Branch Building of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Renton, Washington
It is my honor and pleasure to be here today to help dedicate the new Seattle Branch building, and to speak about how this terrific new facility will assist the Federal Reserve System's efforts to help guide the national economy and serve the payment needs of the Northwest.
As Chairman of the Committee on Federal Reserve Bank Affairs at the Board of Governors, I have followed this building project closely, and value the city's cooperation in helping ensure its future success.
Furthermore, the building's general layout and construction did not meet the post-9/11 security requirements necessary for protecting Federal Reserve System employees and operations.
Clearly, the safety of our employees and operations is a high priority that has become a greater focus in the post-9/11 era, but the building is more than just secure: Its design supports our mission, which is to promote a stable and efficient financial system and to conduct a monetary policy that fosters maximum employment and stable prices.
In recognition of our responsibilities as a community partner, the architecture of the building reflects both the character of the area as well as environmental concerns.
For example, the building site borders a wetlands area that the Bank was careful to consider in situating the structure and tailoring the landscaping.
The natural landscaping around the building reflects the character of the region as well, and it serves as an important feature in the overall design, and helps minimize ongoing maintenance costs.
And besides serving as an attractive asset in the City of Renton and in the greater Seattle metropolitan area, the new building should act as a catalyst for further development of the Longacres area by attracting other financial services facilities.
It will serve as an ideal location for meetings with the Branch board of directors and as a facility for interacting with a wider public audience to exchange information on economic developments in the Northwest.
And these meetings will support our broader monetary policy mission.
Monetary policy is directed by the Federal Open Market Committee, or FOMC, which consists of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and the Reserve Bank presidents.
The FOMC relies on information provided by business people and others and economic intelligence gathered from around the nation.
The Seattle Branch assists FOMC policymakers by monitoring indicators of economic conditions at the grassroots level here in the Northwest through liaison with local community groups and businesses.
In addition, through community outreach, the Seattle Branch supports the Federal Reserve's aim to provide economic information to the community and offer economic and financial education programs to local groups and schools.
Maintaining the effectiveness of the nation's payment system is another important aspect of our work here in the Northwest.
The distribution of currency is critical to the local economy, and the Federal Reserve has the responsibility to ensure the reliability and availability of cash.
I appreciate the opportunity you've provided me to speak about our central bank roles and functions and our strong links with the local economic community.
I am confident that this building will enable us to continue to meet our own mission objectives and serve as an integral member of the community for many years to come.
I congratulate Branch staff and the community for their roles in ushering in this outstanding facility.

At the Annual Meeting of the Board of Governors of the Inter-American Development Bank, Miami, Florida
Strains in global financial markets first became manifest last summer, when sharply rising delinquency rates on subprime mortgages in the United States caused investors to become concerned about the credit quality of home mortgages more broadly and about the exposures of major financial institutions to credit losses.
In the United States, the continued poor functioning of securitization markets, particularly those for private mortgage-backed securities and other structured finance products, as well as pressures on balance sheet capacity at some large banks and a deterioration in loan performance, have led to tighter credit conditions for many households and businesses.
The tightening of credit, along with information suggesting that the housing correction was likely to be deeper and more prolonged than initially thought and that the labor market was weakening, led many analysts to revise down their outlook for economic activity.
In turn, the deterioration in the economic outlook seems to have fed back into financial markets, contributing to lower prices for a range of securities and to trading conditions that are more volatile and less liquid.
The origination of mortgages to borrowers with less-than-prime credit profiles fell sharply over the second half of last year in the United States, and this segment of the market has continued to function poorly.
In contrast, mortgages that qualify for backing by the housing government-sponsored enterprises continue to be readily available to households.
For other types of consumer credit, such as auto loans and credit cards, access has diminished somewhat in recent months as lending standards have been tightened and securitization of consumer loans has become more difficult.
In corporate markets, highly rated firms have continued to issue a sizable volume of bonds, but issuance of speculative-grade debt has been sluggish recently.
In the leveraged loan market, banks have found it difficult to syndicate loans previously underwritten to finance large leveraged buyout deals, and the still-large pipeline of leveraged loans has led to an unplanned expansion of some large banks' balance sheets.
In addition, some banks have taken onto their balance sheets assets for which they provided liquidity backstops or other forms of support.
These balance sheet pressures have come at a time when asset write-downs were already weighing on capital.
As I will discuss later, this episode underscores the important connection for banks between capital adequacy and liquidity, particularly in times of financial market stress.
banking organizations, in the aggregate and individually, have maintained capital ratios in excess of regulatory requirements, in part because of steps taken by many to replenish equity positions.
bank holding companies have raised more than $50 billion in capital.
banking system will continue to face a challenging environment, it remains in sound overall condition, having entered the period of recent financial turmoil with solid capital and strong earnings.
To improve market liquidity and market functioning, and consistent with its role as the nation's central bank, the Federal Reserve has supplemented its longstanding discount window by establishing new facilities to depository institutions and primary dealers.
The first of these actions was initiated in August, when the Federal Reserve modified the terms for borrowing from the discount window.
Then, in December, the Fed introduced a term lending facility that provided funding to depository institutions without the potential stigma of discount window borrowing.
At the same time, the Federal Reserve, in conjunction with other central banks, established reciprocal currency swap arrangements to provide dollars to address elevated pressures in foreign interbank funding markets.
Taken as a group, these actions have had a threefold purpose: to expand the range of institutions with access to collateralized loans from the Federal Reserve, to broaden the types of securities that can be pledged as collateral, and to lengthen the terms of the loans obtained from the Fed.
To date, these liquidity measures seem to have been helpful, as funding pressures on some financial institutions appear to have eased somewhat and as liquidity seems to have improved in several financial markets.
To the extent that these measures improve market functioning, they will have favorable effects on the availability of credit to the broader economy.
In response to the weakening of economic conditions, the Federal Reserve has eased the stance of monetary policy substantially.
The Federal Open Market Committee last month lowered the target for the federal funds rate to 2-1/4 percent--3 percentage points below its level last summer.
The Committee anticipates that these actions, together with the steps we have taken to foster market liquidity, will help to promote growth over time and to mitigate the risks to economic activity.
The remainder of my remarks this morning will cover the implications of these financial market strains for Latin America, focusing on the linkages between the U.S.
Although there have been major structural improvements in Latin American economies, the region is also benefiting from favorable global conditions that are helping to offset potential adverse spillovers from the financial strains.
The recent financial turbulence has been evident in Latin America, but not as strongly as in the United States and Europe.
Treasury securities are up noticeably since early last year, but they remain low from a historical perspective.
The pace of economic growth has edged down in many (but not all) Latin countries from high rates in 2006 and early 2007.
The latest International Monetary Fund (IMF) forecast, however, continues to project solid rates of growth this year and next in most Latin American countries.
With a few notable exceptions, inflation has remained relatively well under control; in most countries, rising commodity prices have led to only modest increases in headline inflation rates.
In light of the recent indications of a weakening U.S.
economy, is there any historical precedent for Latin America to avoid spillovers? In the past, U.S.
Indeed, often the slowdowns in Latin America were much sharper than in the United States.
One of the most famous examples of this effect occurred during the U.S.
economic downturn of the early 1980s, which was associated with high U.S.
The increased pressures on financing flows and the reduced demand for exports contributed to widespread slowdowns in Latin American economies that in many cases were more severe than the U.S.
For example, many Latin countries experienced solid expansions during the U.S.
This restructuring, along with previous fiscal and financial sector reforms in the wake of the debt crisis of the early 1980s, encouraged renewed capital flows to much of Latin America just around the time that the U.S.
These linkages include trade flows, capital flows of various types, and shared global shocks such as the recent run-ups in commodity prices.
An economic slowdown in a key trading partner generally reduces demand for a country's exports, putting downward pressure on overall activity.
However, with the exception of Mexico, most Latin American countries are not particularly exposed to U.S.
A more important linkage for many Latin American countries has been capital flows from the United States and other advanced economies.
Differences in the environment for capital flows, for example, appeared to be a key factor behind the much better outcome in 1990-91 compared with 1981-83.
Bank lending to Latin America has not regained the leading role it held in the 1970s, but it has grown significantly in recent years after a long period of quiescence.
Local-currency bond markets are an important recent development that is attracting some interest from foreign investors, but so far, most of the local-currency issues have been purchased by local investors such as pension funds.1 Foreign capital has surged into Latin American equity markets in recent years, helping to push market capitalizations to new heights.
Finally, foreign direct investment into Latin America is substantial and has continued to grow.
The IMF estimates that total private capital inflows to Latin America jumped to $173 billion last year, compared with an average of $79 billion per year over the previous ten years.2 An important factor fostering these flows has been improvements in macroeconomic and microeconomic policies.
An interesting and potentially important development in the past five to ten years has been the decline of current account deficits throughout Latin America and the rise of current account surpluses in many countries in the region.
Whereas bond issuance in international markets was an important source of capital in the 1990s, the improving fiscal situation led to negative net international bond issuance for Latin America, on balance, during much of the current decade.
Indeed, Brazil recently announced that its foreign assets exceeded its foreign liabilities for the first time ever, reflecting increases in international reserves, buybacks of global bonds, and the retirement of its IMF loans.
Large holdings of foreign exchange reserves provide a valuable cushion against fluctuations in foreign demand for a nation's exports or financial assets.
It is important, however, to recognize that the decline of net capital flows to Latin America has not been accompanied by an equivalent decline in gross flows.
Thus, to a great extent, all countries have become linked by a common global market for capital in a way that we have never seen before.
Global shocks constitute a third set of linkages between the United States and Latin America.
The recent global increases in commodity prices have generally had negative implications for U.S.
growth and positive implications for Latin American growth, as the United States is a net commodity importer and Latin America is a net commodity exporter.
High commodity prices have also encouraged foreign investment, and thus capital flows, to help develop the commodity resources of Latin America.
Of course, commodity prices themselves are influenced by global economic activity; a U.S.
The Inter-American Development Bank background paper for this session argues forcefully that recent strong global growth and high commodity prices provide a very supportive environment for Latin American economies.3 These developments have helped to mitigate the effects on Latin America of financial market strains and the slowdown in U.S.
It is important not to lose sight of the fact that linkages through trade and capital flows continue to be important and, indeed, have even increased over the past decade or so.
What are the lessons that Latin America should draw from the recent financial strains in light of the growing linkages between Latin America and the rest of the world? I think it is extremely important to bolster the great progress that has been made in many countries in the framework of macroeconomic and microeconomic policies and to extend these improvements to those countries that have experienced little improvement so far.
The current attractive conditions for commodity exporters should not deceive us into thinking that Latin America has permanently escaped international business cycles.
On the macro front, the good economic outcomes in most of Latin America that I described earlier reflect greater discipline in both monetary and fiscal policy.
Although there have been some exceptions, central banks in Latin America have demonstrated their resolve to prevent inflation pressures from becoming entrenched.
In terms of microeconomics, bank regulation has been strengthened, and local equity and bond markets have been developed and are growing in a number of Latin American countries.
Together, these structural improvements reduce the vulnerability of the financial system to external and internal shocks.
Not only do better macro policy frameworks help to strengthen local financial systems, but they provide confidence to investors that prudent policies will be taken in the face of external shocks.
Better microeconomic regulatory policies help markets to operate more efficiently, thereby increasing economic growth, which makes continued monetary and fiscal discipline easier to achieve.
The recent financial strains and the potential for spillovers to Latin America only heighten the need for policymakers in the region to avoid complacency.
Among potential microeconomic improvements, developing markets for residential mortgage securities is obviously an important priority for Latin American countries going forward.
Key elements of such markets in any country are solid underwriting standards, meaningful credit disclosure policies, and strong protections for consumers from abusive and deceptive practices.
Toward that end, in the United States, the Federal Reserve has recently proposed stricter regulations for mortgage lenders to protect consumers from abusive practices while maintaining the viability of a market for responsible mortgage lending.
Lenders also would be required to verify the income or assets on which they rely to make credit decisions for higher-priced loans.
The Federal Reserve is also working to improve mortgage disclosures through consumer testing so they are more effective.
These rules are particularly valuable for households that have little experience with homeownership and short credit histories.
Careful underwriting standards and good transparency for borrowers are important building blocks for a healthy market in mortgage-backed securities, which can help to foster the flow of credit to the housing sector in Latin America.
In particular, I'd like to emphasize how recent market events underscore that financial institutions around the globe face important risk management challenges.
As banks have extended their range of activities and involvement in new markets, including the markets for securitized assets, they must, for a number of reasons, be particularly mindful of the potential for concentrations of risk to arise.
Second, risk concentrations can be hidden during normal times and may manifest themselves only during times of stress, such as the recent marketwide increase in the demand for liquidity.
Third, there is an important linkage between risk concentrations and capital: The concentration of risk of a given portfolio markedly affects the amount of capital that should be held against it.
I would like to elaborate on these themes by briefly describing how they can be used to improve the practice of risk management in three fundamental areas: risk identification and measurement, liquidity risk management, and governance and risk control.
The first fundamental of sound risk management relates to risk identification and measurement.
Timely and accurate information is the lifeblood of sound risk management.
Risk managers should live by the adage, "Trust but verify," being careful not to rely on assessments or data from others without conducting proper due diligence.
It is also worth noting that financial institutions should gather information before they see market troubles brewing.
Thus, even if Latin America has not experienced the strains that other markets are experiencing, it is nonetheless important to be proactive about stress testing and scenario analysis.
Understanding a firm's true risk exposures requires examining not just risks on the balance sheet, but also off-balance-sheet risks that are sometimes more difficult to identify and often not so easy to quantify.
Latent risks from certain complex products and certain risky activities are particularly problematic, because they can manifest themselves when market turbulence sets in.
Careful analysis is particularly important for new financial products that have not been fully "road-tested"; this caveat also applies when products with a track record in one country are introduced to another country for the first time or markets develop rapidly in a country.
Stress testing and scenario analysis are essential tools in the analysis of risk, because they can reveal potential concentrations of risk that may not be apparent when using information gleaned from normal times.
Next, I wish to consider the second fundamental, liquidity risk management.
Because of its central role in the business of banking, liquidity risk requires rigorous and effective management.
This is a fundamental truth that may have even greater relevance in Latin American markets, where securities tend to be less liquid than in the United States and where banks rarely have the luxury of selling their loans.
Recent events have shown that during times of systemwide stress, liquidity shocks can become correlated so that the same factors that can lead to liquidity problems for the bank's assets or off-balance-sheet vehicles can simultaneously put pressure on a bank's own funding liquidity.
Again, we see the trouble that risk concentrations can cause if an institution has not tried to identify them in advance and has not taken steps to mitigate their effects.
As I mentioned earlier, we also have noticed the potential for liquidity risk to have an impact on capital adequacy.
In a few cases, unplanned increases in a bank's balance sheet led some banks to take measures to bolster their capital.
Because risk concentrations have the potential to manifest themselves during times of stress and at that time adversely affect capital positions, it is particularly important that firms assess how liquidity events could place pressure on capital levels.
In a nutshell, liquidity problems always have the potential to affect bank balance sheets and, in doing so, bank capital adequacy.
The third fundamental, governance and risk control, has been a key factor that differentiated performance across financial institutions during recent events.4 Clearly, senior management of financial institutions must take on a very active and involved role in risk management.
In some cases, it appears that managers were not fully aware of the extent to which the risks of the different activities undertaken by the firm could, first, become correlated in times of stress and, second, result in high concentrations of risk exposures.
For example, those in senior management may not have been cognizant of a firm's overall concentration to U.S.
subprime mortgages, because they did not realize that in addition to the subprime mortgages on their books, they had exposure through off-balance-sheet vehicles holding such mortgages, through claims on counterparties exposed to subprime, and through certain complex securities.
Senior managers should encourage risk managers to dig deep to uncover not only risks within each business unit, but also risk concentrations that can arise from the set of activities undertaken by the firm as a whole as well as latent risks--such as hidden risk concentrations that can arise from correlation of risk in times of stress.
It can be very difficult to challenge one's colleagues by pointing out business activities that may be creating too much risk, and that is why it is crucial for the risk manager to be known both inside and outside the firm as an independent voice who is influential with top management.
Executives also must set the appropriate tone at the top with respect to the importance of independent and unbiased risk evaluation.
While improvements in both macroeconomic and microeconomic policies have helped to make some Latin American countries less vulnerable to outside shocks, the region is not decoupled from the United States and the rest of the world.
As globalization has proceeded, Latin America is increasingly connected to the world through global capital flows and capital markets.
Further improvements in both macroeconomic and microeconomic policies are imperative to maintain those flows and economic health, particularly in the face of global financial turbulence.
One area that merits particular attention is enhancing the management of risk in financial institutions and markets in Latin America as well as emerging markets more generally.
Committee on the Global Financial System (2007), Financial Stability and Local Currency Bond Markets, CGFS Publications No.
International Monetary Fund (2007), World Economic Outlook: Globalization and Inequality, World Economic and Financial Surveys (Washington: International Monetary Fund, October), p.
Inter-American Development Bank Research Department (2008), "All That Glitters May Not Be Gold: Assessing Latin America's Recent Macroeconomic Performance" (Washington: Inter-American Development Bank, April).
See, for example: Senior Supervisors Group (2008), "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Most Recent Market Turbulence (373 KB PDF)" (New York: Federal Reserve Bank of New York, March 6).

At the Princeton University Center for Economic Policy Studies Dinner, New York, New York
In the terminology of economists, this strategy is usually referred to as "dynamic optimal policy under discretion." And the idea of complete discretion may sound like a great idea--after all, why should you restrict your choices? Nevertheless, in the context of central banking, the modern science of monetary policy indicates that a discretionary approach can lead to poor economic outcomes.1 
Therefore, in my remarks today, I would like to explain how a commitment to keeping inflation low and stable can help foster the stability of economic activity as well as the stability of prices.
After analyzing the pitfalls of discretion and the benefits of a firm commitment to a nominal anchor, I will discuss the role of central bank communication in promoting this commitment.
I will then illustrate these conceptual principles by considering the experiences of other central banks that have adopted explicit numerical inflation objectives.
As usual, these remarks reflect only my own views and are not intended to reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System.2 
Starting in the 1970s, the economics profession began to recognize that the evolution of economic activity and inflation--and hence the design of optimal monetary policy--depends crucially on how households, firms, and financial market investors form their expectations regarding the future course of policy.3 This recognition of the central role of expectations in macroeconomic outcomes led to the discovery of the time-inconsistency problem, a concept that sounds highfalutin but is actually quite intuitive.4 
In essence, if a good long-run plan will not be followed consistently over time because the short-run gains of deviating from the plan are too tempting, then that plan is said to be time-inconsistent.
In such a setting, the time-consistent policy is to reoptimize every period, whereas the preferable alternative would be to establish a firm commitment to the optimal long-run plan.
The time-inconsistency problem arises in the context of monetary policy, because there is a temptation to give a short-run boost to economic output and employment by pursuing a course of policy that is more expansionary than firms or workers had initially expected.5 Nevertheless, if the economy is already at full employment, then this boost is merely transitory: As economic activity rises above its sustainable level, wages and prices begin to rise, and the private sector's inflation expectations start to pick up.
Of course, the central bank must eventually remove the policy stimulus to avoid a continuous upward spiral of inflation.
At that point, economic activity drops back to a sustainable level.
However, inflation settles in at a permanently higher rate because prospects of future monetary expansions become embedded in expectations, and hence in wage and price adjustments, and the higher average inflation rate generates undesirable economic distortions.6 Thus, failing to address the time-inconsistency problem poses the risk of ending up with a higher average inflation rate, with detrimental long-run consequences for economic efficiency and the general standard of living.
As my mother often told me when I was growing up, "The road to hell is paved with good intentions." Similarly, discretionary monetary policy, even though well intended, can lead to poor economic outcomes.
How can a central bank overcome the time-inconsistency problem? The answer is to establish a firm commitment to a nominal anchor--that is, to ensure that inflation remains low and stable over time.
In a speech that I gave last week, I highlighted the merits of specifying an inflation objective in terms of a specific numerical value.7 With an explicit numerical inflation objective, the central bank's strategy is aimed at keeping economic activity close to a sustainable growth path and at maintaining a low and stable inflation rate.
Such a commitment ensures that the central bank resists the temptation to pursue short-run expansionary policies that are inconsistent with the long-run goals of price stability and maximum sustainable employment.
A strong commitment to an explicit numerical inflation objective has other significant benefits.
First, the long-run inflation expectations of households and firms are a key factor in determining the actual behavior of inflation.8 In the absence of a firm nominal anchor, these expectations may wander over time as the private sector revises its assessment of the rate at which inflation is likely to settle down, and those movements in long-run inflation expectations can generate pressure on the current inflation rate.
Thus, by establishing a transparent and credible commitment to a specific numerical objective, monetary policy can provide a firm anchor for long-run inflation expectations, avoiding such pressures and thereby directly contributing to the objective of low and stable inflation.
Moreover, such a commitment can play an important role in minimizing the risk of “inflation scares”--that is, episodes in which longer-term inflation expectations jump sharply in response to specific macroeconomic developments or monetary policy actions.9 
Second, as I emphasized in a speech in late February, establishing a firm commitment to a nominal anchor can help stabilize output and employment.10 Specifically, to counter a contractionary demand shock, the monetary authorities need to reduce the short-run nominal interest rate; however, the effectiveness of such a policy action may be hindered if long-run inflation expectations are not firmly anchored.
For example, if the private sector becomes less certain about the longer-run inflation outlook, then an increase in the inflation risk premium could boost longer-term interest rates by more than the increase in expected inflation.
The higher inflation risk premium would place upward pressure on the real costs of long-term financing for households and businesses (whose debt contracts are almost always expressed in nominal terms) and hence might partially offset the direct monetary stimulus.
Thus, a central bank commitment that firmly anchors long-run inflation expectations can make an important contribution to the effectiveness of the central bank’s actions aimed at stabilizing economic activity in the face of adverse demand shocks.
Third, a strong commitment to an explicit inflation objective provides the central bank with greater flexibility to respond decisively to adverse demand shocks.
Such a commitment helps ensure that an aggressive policy easing is not misinterpreted as signaling a shift in the central bank's inflation objective, and thereby minimizes the possibility that inflation expectations could move upward and lead to a rise in actual inflation.
A strong nominal anchor can be especially valuable in periods of financial market stress; at such times, prompt and decisive policy action may be required to prevent the financial market disruption from causing a severe contraction in economic activity that could further exacerbate uncertainty and financial market stress, leading to a further deterioration in macroeconomic activity, and so on.11 Thus, by providing the central bank with greater flexibility in mitigating the risk of such an adverse feedback loop, the strong commitment to an explicit inflation objective can play an important role in promoting financial stability as well as the stability of economic activity and inflation.
Generally speaking, such shocks tend to result in weaker economic activity as well as higher inflation.
However, when longer-term inflation expectations are firmly anchored, an adverse cost shock is likely to have only transitory effects on actual inflation; hence, there may be no need to raise interest rates aggressively to keep inflation from moving upward.
Thus, the commitment to a nominal anchor can help reduce output and employment fluctuations that impose unnecessary hardship on workers and, more broadly, the economy.
The bottom line is that a transparent and credible commitment to an explicit numerical inflation objective can provide significant benefits in facilitating the central bank's task of stabilizing both economic activity and inflation as well as fostering the stability of the financial system.
Here I will argue that central bank communication to increase transparency and accountability can play a key role in helping central banks maintain a strong commitment to a nominal anchor.
The public announcement of an explicit numerical inflation objective increases the accountability of a central bank and therefore promotes the monetary authority's commitment to delivering low and stable inflation.
As put by a former governor of the Bank of Canada, such objectives give the public a "precise yardstick for measuring how [the central bank] is doing."12 The credibility of the central bank may rise over time as the public comes to appreciate its success in delivering inflation outcomes consistent with its stated numerical objective.
Similarly, the temptation to pursue policy actions inconsistent with the objective--and hence renege on its commitment--may be diminished, because large or persistent deviations of inflation from the stated goal would be observed by the public and thus would be more likely to be called into question.
As I argued in a speech last week, accountability is further enhanced if the inflation objective is stated as a numerical value rather than a range or comfort zone.13 
But couldn't a numerical inflation objective be easily changed at the whim of the central bank or the government? The time-inconsistency problem could then rear its ugly head, because raising the numerical inflation objective could be used to justify more expansionary monetary policy to generate higher employment and output in the short run.
Although this temptation to renege on keeping inflation low and stable might be present, the transparency of a public change in the numerical inflation objective, which will subject it to public scrutiny and debate, makes it much harder to engage in such opportunistic behavior.
Unless an adjustment of the explicit inflation objective is perceived to be driven by analytical considerations, it will be viewed as violating the public's trust.
The resulting loss of credibility on the part of the central bank (or the government) could be devastating; hence, there are strong incentives not to change the inflation objective absent sound technical reasons for doing so.
Indeed, adjustments to the numerical inflation objective or the inflation measure have rarely occurred in practice, and those adjustments have been consistent with clear scientific reasoning.14 
However, two important communication challenges arise in establishing a firm commitment to an explicit numerical inflation objective.
First, a central bank must make clear that this commitment should not be regarded as implying that the central bank will continuously maintain inflation at the specified rate or even that the inflation rate will always return to that rate over a fixed time horizon, in the same way that one might pledge to lose 20 pounds in the next six or nine months.
Given that every economy is constantly buffeted by various shocks, it is generally neither feasible nor desirable to try to keep inflation constant at some specific level.
Thus, a commitment to keep inflation low and stable should be interpreted in a probabilistic sense--that is, policy will act in a manner that keeps inflation close to the inflation objective on average over time, and unusually large shocks may result in more persistent deviations from this objective.
A second challenge stems from the fact that the optimal monetary policy under commitment to an inflation objective is oriented toward minimizing variability in the real economy as well as keeping inflation low and stable.15 As a consequence, when a given shock causes inflation to deviate significantly from the numerical objective, the central bank must communicate how its policy strategy will bring inflation back to this rate within a reasonable timeframe and how this strategy will minimize fluctuations in output and employment over that horizon.16 For example, it is generally desirable to reduce inflation gradually following an adverse cost shock in order to alleviate the contractionary effects on the real economy.
These challenges highlight the extent to which central bank projections for economic activity and inflation play an important role in maintaining a strong commitment to a nominal anchor.17 The central bank must clarify how the economic outlook shapes its current policy actions as well as the anticipated path of policy.
Moreover, as the economy deviates from those forecasts, as it inevitably does, the central bank must explain how policy will adapt to achieve the broad economic goals of price stability and maximum sustainable employment.
Publicly announcing forecasts of inflation has the additional benefit of helping anchor inflation expectations, thereby enhancing the effectiveness of monetary policy actions to stabilize economic activity and lowering the economic cost of maintaining low and stable inflation.
Another benefit of publishing such forecasts is that discussion of the forecast can be used to highlight the analysis and reasoning behind monetary policy decisions, which can help the public to better understand monetary policy actions and strengthen the central bank’s credibility.
Even if a central bank recognizes that a policy geared solely toward near-term economic activity will lead to poor outcomes--high inflation with lower economic growth--it still may not be able to commit to a strong nominal anchor and avoid the time-inconsistency problem, because special interests may try to apply pressure on the central bank to boost employment in the short term through an overly expansionary monetary policy.18 
How can the central bank be insulated from short-run pressures to pursue expansionary policy at the expense of high inflation? There is a broad international consensus that the central bank should have full authority to determine the short-run setting of its policy instruments, without any external interference.19 In addition, I believe that central bank communication is crucial in promoting public support for maintaining low and stable inflation.
Indeed, in a democratic society, every government agency is ultimately accountable to the public, and the establishment of transparent objectives and of a clear policy strategy plays an essential role in facilitating that accountability.
The old adage correctly states that "Actions speak louder than words," and, clearly, just announcing an objective for inflation does not mean anything unless the actual policies pursued by the monetary authorities are consistent with the objective.
Words, however, do matter if those words help ensure that the appropriate policy actions will be taken and strengthen the public's confidence that the central bank will continue to act in a manner consistent with its long-run objectives.
As I have argued here, the increase in transparency and accountability, which results from clear communication about inflation objectives and about how monetary policy will be conducted to achieve these objectives, creates stronger incentives for central banks to avoid the pursuit of short-run overly expansionary policies.
This approach also helps establish a credible commitment to pursuing policies that keep inflation under control and economic activity growing on a sustainable path.
But one might reasonably ask whether communication about inflation objectives and about how monetary policy is conducted to achieve these objectives actually helps strengthen the commitment to fostering low and stable inflation, and thereby produces better economic outcomes.
More specifically: Does communication of inflation objectives lead to increased public support for the central bank? Improved inflation performance? More firmly anchored inflation expectations?
Over the past two decades, most of the major foreign central banks have adopted frameworks which have the overriding objective of bolstering public confidence that policymakers will act to keep inflation low and stable.
While self-declared "inflation targeters" are the most prominent in this regard, other central banks also have introduced explicit inflation objectives of some kind, generally in the form of a preferred inflation point or range.20 To address the questions that I listed earlier, I will draw lessons from the international experience with explicit numerical inflation objectives, while deferring further consideration of the United States until the conclusion of these remarks.
I have already noted that increased central bank independence helps support a commitment to a strong nominal anchor and thus should lead to better inflation performance.
Evidence supports the conjecture that macroeconomic performance is improved when central banks are more independent.
For example, when central banks in industrialized countries are ranked according to the degree of legal independence of the central bank, those countries with the highest degree of central bank independence are found to have the best inflation performance.21 
I have also argued that adopting an explicit objective can help strengthen the accountability of monetary policy actions and hence may promote public support for the operational independence of the central bank.
Although there has been a pronounced trend toward increased central bank independence at the same time that monetary policy frameworks have adopted explicit inflation objectives, it would be unwarranted to claim that this correlation implies causation from adoption of explicit inflation objectives to central bank independence.
One example that illustrates how having an explicit inflation objective encouraged public support for stabilizing inflation and for the independence of the central bank occurred in Canada in 1996.
At that time, there was an important public debate about whether monetary policy was excessively contractionary.22 In this case, the existence of an explicit inflation objective channeled that debate into a substantive discussion over what should be the appropriate target for inflation, with both the Bank of Canada and its critics obliged to make explicit their assumptions and estimates of the costs and benefits of different levels of inflation.
Indeed, the debate, as well as the Bank of Canada's record and responsiveness to that debate, led to increased support for the Bank, with the result that criticism of the Bank and its conduct of monetary policy became much less of a political issue.
Another interesting example, which I do not have time to discuss in detail here, occurred with the granting of operational independence to the Bank of England in May 1997 after it had adopted an explicit numerical inflation objective.23 In explaining the decision to grant operational independence to the Bank of England, the government specifically pointed to the Bank's successful performance in providing forecasts and clear explanations of the likely effects of a range of policy alternatives, thereby increasing accountability and making the central bank more responsive to political oversight.
The adoption of a monetary policy framework with an explicit inflation objective has hinged on the belief that such a framework ultimately delivers better inflation outcomes.
Thus, it is legitimate to inquire whether inflation outcomes in the economies that have adopted such frameworks have been in line with the stated objectives.
Chart 1 displays the inflation objective and the relevant measure of realized inflation in a sample of industrialized economies.
Overall, the economies that adopted explicit inflation objectives have experienced substantial improvements in their inflation performance; indeed, in each case the central bank has been largely successful at keeping inflation in line with the stated objective, sometimes even more than might have been anticipated when establishing that objective.24 Of course, inflation has occasionally deviated from the objective, as one would expect from the fact that every economy is continuously buffeted by various sorts of shocks.
Nonetheless, these inflation deviations have been relatively small and transitory by historical standards.
Most important, there is little evidence of a systematic upward bias in inflation, which would arise if the central bank were attempting to stimulate output beyond what would be consistent with maintaining low and stable inflation.
I also want to emphasize that this improvement in inflation performance has not been at the expense of higher employment and output fluctuations; indeed, the variability of output and employment fluctuations has generally declined in those economies where the central bank has maintained an explicit inflation objective.25 
Economies with explicit numerical inflation objectives have (fortunately) not been alone in enjoying relatively low and stable inflation over the past couple of decades; indeed, in some cases, inflation was already low and stable prior to the adoption of the explicit objective.
It is thus legitimate to investigate whether the establishment of an explicit inflation objective has had other measurable effects, particularly with regard to the anchoring of long-run inflation expectations.26 
Chart 2 presents realized inflation along with a survey-based measure of mean inflation expectations at the two-year-ahead and six-to-ten-year-ahead horizons.
First, survey-based measures of long-term inflation expectations have converged toward the official inflation objective in all countries.
This fact is consistent with central banks making credible, long-term commitments to pursuing their objectives, even in countries where the objective must be renewed on a regular basis.
Moreover, surveys of professional forecasters in each of these economies reveal that, on average, forecasters expect deviations in realized inflation to disappear within two years or less.
In effect, these forecasters anticipate that the central bank will take the policy actions necessary to ensure that inflation lines up with the explicit objective over a reasonable time horizon.
Econometric analysis of financial market data also indicates that long-run inflation expectations are firmly anchored in each of the economies in which the central bank has an explicit numerical inflation objective.27 
In a speech last week, I argued that the science of monetary policy provides a strong rationale for framing the inflation goal in terms of a specific point objective rather than a range or comfort zone.28 My remarks today provide further elaboration about how the establishment of a firm commitment to an explicit numerical inflation objective contributes to better outcomes for both inflation and economic activity.
First, I have explained the pitfalls of discretionary monetary policy and the benefits of a strong commitment to a nominal anchor.
Second, I have considered how central bank communications promote such a commitment.
Third, I have highlighted some key lessons from the experiences of other major industrial economies that have adopted explicit inflation objectives.
Finally, you may have noticed that I haven’t said much about the United States in this speech.
Nevertheless, the principles emphasized in my remarks today and in last week's speech have potentially important implications for the ongoing process of refining the Federal Reserve's policy framework and of enhancing our communications.
Indeed, as Chairman Bernanke has recently indicated, our communication strategy is "a work in progress," and the Federal Reserve "will continue to look for ways to improve the accountability and public understanding of U.S.
monetary policy making."29 I hope that these remarks will be helpful in contributing to the continuation of that process.

"Central Bank Independence and Macroeconomic Performance: Some Comparative Evidence," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"A Positive Theory of Monetary Policy in a Natural Rate Model," Journal of Political Economy, vol.
"Are Long-Run Inflation Expectations Anchored More Firmly in the Euro Area than in the United States?" Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 6536.
"The New UK Monetary Arrangements: A View from the Literature," Economic Journal, vol.
"Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14.
"On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary Economy," Econometrica, vol.
"Definition of Price Stability, Range and Point Inflation Targets, and the Anchoring of Long-Term Inflation Expectations," in O.
Issing, ed., Background Studies for the ECB’s Evaluation of its Monetary Policy Strategy (1.82 MB PDF).
"Central Bank Independence, Political Influence and Macroeconomic Performance: A Survey of Recent Development," Cuadernos de Economía, vol.
"Central Bank Independence and Monetary Policy Making Institutions: Past, Present, and Future," Journal Economía Chileña, vol.
"How Independent Should a Central Bank Be?" in Jeffrey C.
Fuhrer, ed., Goals, Guidelines, and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Conference Series No.
"Quantitative Goals for Monetary Policy," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
"Central Bank Independence and Credibility: Is There a Shred of Evidence?" International Finance, vol.
"Interest Rate Policy and the Inflation Scare Problem: 1979-1992 (636 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, Economic Quarterly, vol.
"Does Inflation Targeting Anchor Long-Run Inflation Expectations? Evidence from Long-Term Bond Yields in the U.S., U.K., and Sweden," Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper 5808.
"The New Inflation Target (108 KB PDF)," speech delivered at the Birmingham Forward/CBI Business Luncheon, Birmingham, United Kingdom, January 20.
"The Macroeconomic Effects of Inflation Targeting (406 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of St.
86 (July/August, Inflation Targeting: Prospects and Problems, Proceedings of the Twenty-Eighth Annual Economic Policy Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
"Expectations and the Neutrality of Money," Journal of Economic Theory, vol.
"Some International Evidence on Output-Inflation Tradeoffs," American Economic Review, vol.
"Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique," Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, vol.
"Disagreement about Inflation Expectations," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper # 9796.
"Inflation Dynamics," speech delivered at the Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 23.
"Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10.
"Will Monetary Policy Become More of a Science?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-44.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.
"The Federal Reserve's Enhanced Communication Strategy and the Science of Monetary Policy," speech delivered to the Undergraduate Economics Association at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., November 29.
"Monetary Policy Flexibility, Risk Management, and Financial Disruptions," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, January 11.
"Does Stabilizing Inflation Contribute to Stabilizing Economic Activity?" speech delivered at East Carolina University, Greenville, N.C., February 25.
"Inflation Targeting: Lessons from Four Countries," Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic Policy Review, vol.
"One Decade of Inflation Targeting in the World: What Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know?" in Norman Loayza and Raimundo Soto, eds., Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges.
"Does Inflation Targeting Make a Difference?" NBER Working Paper No.
"Inflation Band Targeting and Optimal Inflation Contracts," NBER Working Paper No.
"Optimal Inflation Targets, 'Conservative' Central Banks, and Linear Inflation Contracts," American Economic Review, vol.

Mishkin (2007c) provides extensive discussion of the modern science of monetary policy and its implications for the design and communication of the policy framework.
Barro and Gordon (1983) first described the time-inconsistency problem as it applied to monetary policy.
As described in Mishkin (2008c), a higher average inflation rate tends to generate distortions in relative prices, a reduction in the level of investment in physical capital, and a decline in private-sector holdings of currency and other non-interest-bearing financial assets.
First, the New Zealand government raised the upper bound of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand's inflation band by 1 percentage point in 1996 (from 2 percent to 3 percent) and raised the lower bound by 1 percentage point in 2002 (from 0 percent to 1 percent); these changes were consistent with the science of monetary policy, which had reached a consensus that allowing inflation to remain very close to zero could have detrimental consequences for the economy (Mishkin, 2008c).
Second, the Bank of England's inflation objective was modified in late 2003, establishing a target of 2 percent for the consumer price index (CPI) that replaced the previous target of 2-1/2 percent for the retail price index excluding mortgage interest (RPIX).
In that case, as noted by the Governor of the Bank of England, there were significant conceptual reasons for switching to the RPIX as a measure of U.K.
inflation, while the downward adjustment of 1/2 percentage point in the numerical objective reflected the average magnitude of deviations between CPI inflation and RPIX inflation over the previous decade or so (King, 2004).
Indeed, the Federal Reserve has published quantitative forecasts for several key macroeconomic variables (output growth, unemployment, and inflation) as part of its semiannual reports to the Congress since 1979.
Several months ago, the Federal Reserve enhanced its communications by publishing these forecasts on a quarterly basis, lengthening the horizon of the projections, and providing additional quantitative and qualitative information (Bernanke, 2007; Mishkin, 2007d).
Almost two centuries ago, British economist David Ricardo summarized the argument for granting operational independence to the central bank: "It is said that Government could not be safely entrusted with the power of issuing paper money; that it would most certainly abuse it.…There would, I confess, be great danger of this if Government--that is to say, the Ministers--were themselves to be entrusted with the power of issuing paper money" (Ricardo, 1823).
Independence to set policy instruments also insulates the central bank from the myopia that can be a feature of the political process.
Instrument independence thus makes it more likely that the central bank will be forward-looking and adequately allow for the long lags from monetary policy actions to inflation in setting its policy instruments.
I discussed the relative merits of inflation objectives stated as points or ranges in Mishkin (2008c).
Further analysis and discussion is given by Alesina and Summers (1993), Cukierman (1993), and Debelle and Fischer (1994); Forder (2000) and Cukierman (2006) have surveyed the more recent literature on central bank independence.
This debate was triggered by a speech given by the president of the Canadian Economic Association.
Until May 1997, the setting of the monetary policy instrument had been determined by the government, not by the Bank of England.
At that point, the newly appointed Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, announced that the Bank of England would henceforth have the responsibility for setting both the base interest rate and short-term exchange-rate interventions.
The following anecdote provides a measure of the extent to which some policymakers were pleasantly surprised by their central bank's success in keeping inflation in line with its objective.
The Governor of the Bank of England must write an open letter to the Chancellor of the Exchequer when inflation deviates from the official target by more than 1 percentage point.
About a year after the Bank of England was granted operational independence, the Bank's chief economist wrote that "[even] if inflation shocks were to disappear entirely, the continued presence of demand shocks would imply that [open letters] would still be triggered more than 40 percent of the time" (Bean, 1998).
A decade later, inflation has remained within 1 percentage point of the target in all but a single month, or less than 1 percent of the time.
I will spare the audience a thorough discussion of the methodological issues involved in the measurement of inflation expectations.
Some recent work on the topic was presented at the Conference on Price Measurement for Monetary Policy, hosted by the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas on May 24-25, 2007.
There is also some evidence that the dispersion of inflation expectations may decrease with adoption of explicit inflation objectives.
Mankiw, Reis, and Wolfers (2003) have shown that simple survey statistics, such as the mean or median inflation expectations, can sometimes hide substantial cross-sectional dispersion in survey responses.
If a central bank's credibility in meeting the inflation objective truly increases over time, one should then observe less disagreement among inflation forecasters.
The international evidence on this aspect is unfortunately scant due to limited data availability.
Beechey, Johannsen, and Levin (2007) recently showed that the cross-sectional dispersion of long-run inflation expectations in the European Central Bank (ECB) Survey of Professional Forecasters, as measured by the standard deviation, has more than halved since the ECB, with its explicit inflation objectives, was launched in 1999.
Although this evidence cannot be used directly to measure the impact that the adoption of an explicit inflation objective has on the dispersion of inflation expectations, it nevertheless suggests that there are additional benefits to increasing a central bank’s credibility.

The mortgage market has long been a source of strength in the U.S.
economy, but it is facing significant challenges, especially in the subprime segment that serves consumers who have shorter or weaker credit records.
As of January 2008, the most recent month for which data are available, about 24 percent of subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) were ninety or more days delinquent, twice the level one year earlier.1 Roughly 190,000 foreclosures were started on these mortgages in the fourth quarter, up 11 percent from the previous quarter.2 The significance of the problems with subprime loan performance is evident in the unusually high rate of defaults within a few months of loan origination, known as early payment defaults.
In January 2008, nearly 9 percent of subprime ARMs originated in the previous six months were already ninety or more days delinquent, twice the rate of the year before and nearly four times the rate two years earlier.3
These problems have many causes, but the role of abusive lending practices is of particular concern.
Practices that have hurt consumers have also undermined the confidence of investors and contributed to a virtual shutdown of the subprime market with consequences for other segments of the mortgage market.
The implications of diminished access to mortgage credit are of particular concern to the audience today, given that the subprime market was the source of home purchase loans extended to many in the Hispanic community.
These events have highlighted the shared interest of mortgage borrowers, their communities, lenders, and investors in protecting borrowers from abusive practices and preserving their choices.
Protecting borrowers with responsible underwriting standards also protects the integrity and proper functioning of the mortgage market by increasing investor confidence.
Effective consumer protection produces a complementary benefit for consumers by making more capital available to meet their needs.
Similarly, systematic efforts to keep borrowers who may have trouble meeting their loan obligations in their homes on a sustainable basis, by providing more certainty to the market, can have the complementary benefit of ensuring the flow of capital for potential borrowers.
Given the high cost of foreclosures to lenders and investors and the disruption and distress that foreclosure can cause to consumers, their families, and their communities, it is in everyone's interest to avoid foreclosures whenever other viable options exist.
With large numbers of borrowers facing potential repayment problems, it is in the interest of borrowers and investors alike for the industry to develop prudent loan modification programs and other assistance to help borrowers on a systematic and sustainable basis.

The Federal Housing Administration has established the FHASecure plan to provide qualified borrowers who are delinquent because of an interest rate reset and who have some equity in the home the opportunity to refinance into an FHA-insured mortgage.
I have been an active proponent of such streamlined systematic approaches to reduce transactions costs and to help mitigate foreclosure risk, and I strongly encourage market participants to adopt and to implement these fast-track modification proposals as quickly as possible.
The Federal Reserve has been working with financial institutions and community groups around the country to address the challenges posed by problem loans.
For instance, we have been providing community coalitions, counseling agencies, fellow regulators, and others with detailed analyses identifying neighborhoods at high risk of foreclosures.
By understanding those areas with concentrations of subprime mortgages, delinquencies, and foreclosures, community leaders can better target their scarce resources to borrowers in need of counseling and other interventions that may help forestall foreclosure.
Toward this end, the Federal Reserve has recently engaged in a partnership with NeighborWorks America to help identify strategies to help stabilize neighborhoods.
The Federal Reserve has worked to support consumers by providing them with the information they need to understand and shop for banking products, as well as to file a complaint against a bank.
Importantly, we have just launched a Spanish-language version of the Federal Reserve Consumer Help Center to help better meet the needs of Spanish-speaking consumers.
I will now focus on the Board's recent proposal for stricter regulations prohibiting abusive and deceptive practices in the mortgage market under authority of the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA).
Though clear, the standards are intended to be not overly prescriptive, so as to preserve access to responsible credit while amply protecting consumers.
Our proposal is also comprehensive, covering most mortgage loans with certain protections and the entire subprime market with certain more specific regulations.
Our analysis of the data suggested that the troubles in the mortgage market generally arise not from a single practice in isolation, but instead from the complex ways that risk factors and underwriting practices can affect each other, sometimes called "risk layering." Therefore, we have proposed using a loan's annual percentage rate, or APR, to determine whether the loan is covered by stricter regulations.5 Because the APR is closely correlated to risk, the proposed protections would cover loans with higher risks rather than single out particular risk factors or underwriting practices.
With the APR thresholds we have proposed, we expect that the new protections would cover the entire subprime mortgage market and the riskier end of the "near prime" market, the latter also known as the "alt-A" market.
Covering part of the alt-A market would anticipate possible actions by lenders to avoid restrictions on subprime loans priced near the threshold.
However, we have heard from commenters who have expressed concern that in the current market environment, the proposed trigger could cover the market too broadly, and we will carefully consider the issues they raise and other possible approaches to achieve our objective.
Extending credit that borrowers can afford to repay is a fundamental pillar of responsible lending.
This robust approach to affordability would help ensure that the subprime market promotes sustainable homeownership.
Clear lending standards have the further advantages of increasing investor confidence in the mortgage market and helping to revive the flow of credit to consumers with shorter or weaker credit records.
For example, the proposal would prohibit a pattern or practice of disregarding the ratio of applicants' income to their debt, but it does not prescribe a maximum ratio because the appropriate number depends heavily on other risk factors, which vary from loan to loan.
Moreover, the regulations would be legally enforceable by supervisory and enforcement agencies.
The proposed rule's potential for consumer actions, coupled with its careful avoidance of prescribing quantitative underwriting thresholds, could raise compliance and litigation risk.
In turn, this could raise the cost of credit for higher-risk borrowers or limit the availability of responsible credit.
That is why we have proposed prohibiting a "pattern or practice" of disregarding repayment ability rather than attaching a risk of legal liability to every individual loan that does not perform.
Moreover, when we looked at the loan-level data we saw a clear correlation between "low-doc" or "no-doc" lending and performance problems, particularly early payment defaults.
That is why we have proposed to complement a broad requirement to assess repayment ability with a specific requirement to verify the income or assets a lender relies on to make a credit decision.
This rule is meant to preserve consumer choice by allowing the market to identify credible nontraditional documentation of consumer income--for example, check-cashing receipts.
To help ensure that the proposal preserves access to credit for the full range of consumers, we have sought public comment on this issue.
Consumers with shorter or weaker credit histories may be less likely to appreciate the sizable burden that taxes and insurance can add to the cost of homeownership, or more vulnerable to being misled by payment quotes that leave out these amounts.
Moreover, when we looked at the data, we saw in the unusually high level of early payment defaults possible evidence that the lack of escrows hurt consumers who did not have experience paying property tax and insurance bills.
Accordingly, we have proposed a ban on prepayment penalties in circumstances of a high degree of risk to the consumer, and we are also addressing transparency concerns.
Specifically, a penalty would be prohibited where the borrower's debt-to-income ratio exceeds 50 percent, and a penalty would have to expire before a loan's payment could increase.
There is another potential source of risk to consumers that I want to address that is related to "steering"--the risk that when they use the services of a mortgage broker, they do not appreciate the extent to which the broker's interests may diverge from the consumer's interests because of "yield spread premiums."7
The growth of the market for brokerage services has no doubt increased competition in the market for mortgage loans, to the benefit of consumers.
Moreover, the yield spread premium, a payment from a lender to a broker based on the loan's interest rate, is sometimes the best way for a consumer to fund the cost of a broker's services.
However, when a lender pays a broker for a loan that has a higher rate, that payment can create a conflict of interest between the broker and the consumer.
We have begun a comprehensive program of rigorous consumer testing of potential improvements to current disclosures.
As I noted at the outset, effective consumer protection can help to restore confidence in the mortgage markets and help to preserve the flow of capital to consumers who wish to purchase a home.
The Federal Reserve will do its part to ensure compliance among the institutions it supervises.
We also have been instrumental in launching a pilot project with other federal and state agencies to conduct consumer compliance reviews of non-depository lenders and other industry participants.
I am sure we will be aided in these efforts by a new system for registering and tracking mortgage brokers recently launched by the Conference of State Bank Supervisors.
While we work to build effective consumer protections and enforcement regimes for future consumers, we will also continue our efforts, and encourage the initiatives many others are undertaking, to limit unnecessary foreclosures for consumers who are hurting now.
Federal Reserve Consumer Help can be accessed online at www.federalreserveconsumerhelp.gov/index_sp.cfm.
Under the proposal, a "higher-priced mortgage loan" would have an APR that exceeds the yield on comparable Treasury securities by three or more percentage points for first-lien loans, or five or more percentage points for subordinate-lien loans.
On an adjustable-rate mortgage, the fully-indexed rate is the sum of the value of the applicable index as of loan origination and the margin specified in the loan agreement.
For example, a typical 2/28 mortgage issued in 2006 might have a fully-indexed rate of 11.37.
A "yield spread premium" is the present dollar value of the difference between the lowest interest rate the wholesale lender would have accepted on a particular transaction and the interest rate the broker actually obtained for the lender.

It's a genuine pleasure to address the Virginia Association of Economists here at Washington and Lee University on an important issue in monetary policy.
Although this speech has a somewhat humorous title, my remarks will address a serious and important topic, namely, how central banks promote the stability of prices and economic activity and how this policy framework is communicated to the public.
More specifically, I will consider whether central banks should describe price stability in terms of a desired range of inflation outcomes--often referred to as a "comfort zone" for inflation--or in terms of a specific numerical value at which the inflation rate is expected to settle down over some reasonable time horizon.
After a brief review of the academic literature regarding the level of inflation that best promotes longer-run economic growth and employment, I will discuss several conceptual issues regarding the pitfalls of comfort zones and the benefits of specifying a point objective for inflation.
As usual, my remarks reflect only my own views and are not intended to reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System.1
Research in monetary economics usually specifies monetary policy objectives in terms of stabilizing both inflation and economic activity.2   Those two goals are related:  Maintaining price stability promotes stronger economic activity in the long run.
What do we mean by price stability?  A widely cited definition is that the inflation rate is sufficiently low so that households and businesses do not need to take inflation into account in making everyday decisions.3  Broadly speaking, I believe this definition of price stability is a reasonable one, and in practice, central banks around the world have chosen average levels of inflation between 0 and 3 percent as consistent with this criterion.
However, this range can be narrowed a bit further by considering the implications of economic theory and empirical evidence about the average inflation rate that produces the best economic outcomes.
In particular, the literature on the optimal inflation rate not only bolsters the case for low inflation but also highlights the risks of maintaining an excessively low inflation rate.
All economists agree that hyperinflations, such as the one in Germany in the 1920s, are particularly damaging due to the resulting distortion of economic incentives and the waste of valuable resources.
Even rates of inflation far short of hyperinflation appear detrimental to economic performance, as evidenced by the double-digit inflation rates of the 1970s.
 And over the past decade or so, central bankers and academic economists have reached a remarkable degree of consensus about the desirability of low and stable inflation--and as you know, arriving at a consensus is quite rare for economists.
The average rate of inflation distorts the efficient allocation of resources through three main channels.
First, because some firms face costs in changing their prices, a rise in the general price level tends to generate undesirable movements in relative prices, thereby leading to an inefficient allocation of resources.
In an imperfectly indexed tax system, inflation seriously distorts saving and investment because investment income is taxed on the basis of its nominal rather than inflation-adjusted or real value.
In those circumstances, price stability may considerably improve the efficiency of the economy.5  Third, a higher average inflation rate tends to generate distortions by raising the cost of holding currency and other non-interest-bearing assets.6 
While the benefits of low inflation are now widely recognized, somewhat less attention has been given to the pitfalls of maintaining inflation rates very close to zero, so I will now discuss this issue in somewhat greater detail.
Specifically, if the average inflation rate is too low, then the economy faces a greater risk that a given adverse shock could distort labor markets, induce debt deflation, or cause monetary policy to become constrained by the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.
These risks imply that undershooting a zero inflation objective is potentially more costly than overshooting that objective by the same amount, and that setting the inflation objective at a rate a bit above zero provides some insurance against these risks.
Inflation at rates close to zero might create nonnegligible costs to the economy because firms may be relatively reluctant to cut nominal wages.7  Sticky nominal wages can prevent labor markets from reaching the optimal equilibrium.
Keeping the average inflation rate close to zero increases the likelihood that the economy will experience occasional episodes of deflation.
As described by Irving Fisher (1933), an episode of deflation can lead to "debt deflation," that is, a substantial rise in the real indebtedness of households and firms, because the nominal values of debt obligations are largely predetermined whereas the nominal values of household income and business revenue are falling together with the general price level.9  Indeed, the deterioration of the balance sheets of households and firms can result in financial turmoil that contributes to further deflation and greater macroeconomic instability.
With a very low average inflation rate, monetary policy is also more likely to encounter circumstances in which short-term interest rates are constrained by the so-called zero lower bound on nominal interest rates.10  Specifically, investors will never choose to lend money at a negative nominal interest rate because they always have the option of simply holding cash at a zero interest rate; thus, nominal interest rates cannot fall below zero.
A number of researchers in the Federal Reserve System and elsewhere have analyzed the implications of the zero lower bound in estimated dynamic rational expectations models.11  If the economy faces a large contractionary shock, the optimal monetary policy response is to push the short-term nominal interest rate below the level of expected inflation, thereby reducing real interest rates enough to mitigate the impact of the shock.
But if the central bank has an inflation objective very close to zero, the zero lower bound can prevent the full implementation of this policy response, and hence the economy will tend to exhibit greater volatility of economic activity and inflation.
In contrast, given shocks like those seen over the past several decades, an average inflation rate higher than about 1 percent substantially reduces the frequency with which the economy hits the zero lower bound.
An inflation objective of about 2 percent implies that monetary policy is rarely constrained by the zero lower bound and thereby minimizes the adverse consequences for macroeconomic stability.
These considerations provide the foundations for a broad consensus among academic economists and monetary policymakers around the world that the optimal inflation rate is in the range of about 1 to 3 percent; that is, an average inflation rate outside this range would be detrimental to longer-run health of the economy.
In light of that consensus, it might seem natural to specify price stability in terms of a range of acceptable outcomes for inflation.
Indeed, several present and past FOMC participants have used the term "comfort zone" and specified a 1 to 2 percent range, thereby providing valuable information regarding their views about what levels of inflation are consistent with the Federal Reserve's dual mandate.12
Nevertheless, while a "comfort zone" approach may seem appealing, analytical considerations reveal some disadvantages of that approach as well as some significant benefits of specifying and maintaining a point objective for inflation.
First, when the price stability objective is formulated in terms of an acceptable range of inflation outcomes, the policy implications may be difficult to interpret.
For example, if the comfort zone spans a range from 1 to 2 percent, does that mean that policymakers are equally comfortable with inflation rates of 1.1 percent and 1.9 percent?   Furthermore, confusion about inflation objectives might make it harder for a committee of policymakers to decide on the appropriate course of monetary policy.
When one member advocates a more accommodative policy stance than other members, it may not be clear whether that reflects a more negative outlook for the economy or a greater willingness to allow inflation to settle in or near the top of the comfort zone.
Thus, the comfort zone approach might lead to greater confusion in policy deliberations and hence produce a less effective decisionmaking process.
Second, framing price stability in terms of a comfort zone could lead to perverse expectations dynamics and thereby generate larger fluctuations in economic activity, especially if policymakers maintain a neutral stance regardless of where the inflation rate falls within the comfort zone.
For instance, a negative shock to aggregate demand that brought inflation near the bottom end of the range might cause long-run expected inflation to fall, which would raise the real interest rate if the nominal interest rate remained unchanged.
This rise in the real interest rate would exert a further drag that could exacerbate the adverse impact of the original negative shock on the economy.
Similarly, a positive shock to aggregate demand that raised inflation to the upper end of the range might cause a rise in expected inflation and thus a decline in the real interest rate, which would provide further stimulus to the economy.
The result would then be more pronounced swings in economic activity.
Third, if a central bank places a high degree of emphasis on the boundaries of the comfort zone, then these threshold effects imply nonlinearities in the conduct of monetary policy that are likely to produce less desirable economic outcomes (Orphanides and Wieland, 2000).
For example, the stance of policy would remain roughly neutral in response to a shock that leaves inflation just below the upper end of the comfort zone, whereas a slightly larger shock that pushes inflation just above that boundary would cause an abrupt shift to a contractionary policy stance.
Such a "stop-start" approach is likely to cause greater uncertainty in financial markets and would also tend to generate greater volatility of the macroeconomy.
First, as I have emphasized in several previous speeches, communication plays a crucial role in the success of monetary policy (Mishkin, 2007b and 2007c).
And in this regard, it seems virtually self-evident that communicating about a single numerical value for the inflation objective is more straightforward than communicating about an interval or range of numbers.
Of course, regardless of whether the central bank has a point objective or a comfort zone, it is inevitable that the inflation rate will fluctuate in response to various shocks; that's why it is also crucial for policymakers to communicate clearly about the outlook for the macroeconomy and about the central bank's strategy for promoting the stability of prices and economic activity.
An explicit point objective anchors inflation expectations more effectively than a comfort zone.
If the comfort zone is considered to be a zone of indifference, then the inflation rate might well exhibit highly persistent fluctuations inside the zone, perhaps even looking like a random walk within that range.
In that case, if inflation drifts up to the top of the comfort zone, then the private sector could take the view that inflation might remain at that rate for an extended period of time, especially if policymakers are not taking any action to bring inflation back toward the midpoint of the range.
Thus, the comfort zone might then generate somewhat larger fluctuations in longer-run inflation expectations, which would in turn tend to contribute to wider fluctuations in actual inflation.
In contrast, with a transparent and credible point objective, longer-run inflation expectations will be firmly anchored at that rate.
Even if policymakers are relatively indifferent about the level of inflation within a comfort zone, research on the optimal design of monetary policy indicates that they shouldn't be:  The central bank should actively seek to bring inflation back to the midpoint of its comfort zone, thereby minimizing the probability that inflation wanders outside the boundaries of that zone.
In effect, the optimal policy strategy takes into account the benefits of insurance, and hence the midpoint of the zone becomes the point objective for inflation (Mishkin and Westelius, 2006).
Now let's turn to the international experience.13  As shown in table 1, a number of major industrial economies have adopted explicit inflation objectives  In 1990, the newly independent Reserve Bank of New Zealand became the first central bank to establish such an objective.
Many governments have followed in New Zealand's footsteps, and the inflation objectives have been variously expressed in the form of a point, a range with a preferred midpoint, or a comfort zone (that is, a range of indifference).
In some cases, the inflation objective was adopted in part as a way to lock in the benefits of recent disinflation and to prevent the return of adverse inflation outcomes.
New Zealand, whose inflation performance in the 1970s and 1980s was the worst among the industrialized economies, is arguably one such example.
In other instances, inflation had already been kept low and stable for some time, and the adoption of an explicit inflation objective followed from extensive research and debate on issues such as the benefits of low and stable inflation, the presence of biases in the measurement of inflation, and the importance of central bank communications.
Although the mix of reasons and circumstances that led to the adoption of an explicit inflation objective varies across economies, there is a remarkable degree of similarity in the characteristics of these policy frameworks, from which three broad conclusions can be drawn.
First, there is a fairly general consensus among central banks throughout the world that the average inflation rate should be somewhere between about 1 percent and 3 percent.
Second, point objectives have proven more effective than ranges in anchoring inflation expectations.
Third, when the inflation objective is formulated in terms of a range, the implied degree of nonlinearity in the central bank's policy actions can be alleviated by placing increased emphasis on the midpoint of the range.
The monetary policy objective of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand is to "keep future CPI inflation outcomes between 1 and 3 per cent on average over the medium term."  The narrowness of this range may seem surprising, especially given the historical volatility of inflation in New Zealand.
After all, New Zealand is a small open economy with a large commodity-producing sector, and as a result the economy is particularly subject to external shocks that can have a relatively large impact on consumer prices.
In this context, the use of a narrow comfort zone would increase the odds that inflation would fall outside the band at certain times.
Some observers have argued that such outcomes may undermine the public's trust in the central bank's ability to deliver inflation outcomes in line with its stated objective, and hence that the inflation band should be widened.14  Nevertheless, a wider band would hinder the anchoring of inflation expectations, which is pivotal to the successful pursuit of an explicit inflation objective.
As the previous discussion has illustrated, expressing an inflation objective in terms of a range makes it more difficult for a central bank to anchor inflation expectations, especially in the absence of any explicit emphasis on the midpoint.
A related issue is that the boundaries of the range may be seen as "hard edges," that is, inflation outcomes inside the range may be seen as qualitatively different from those outside the range.
The nonlinear policy reactions implied by this approach can lead to greater variations in interest rates, exchange rates, and output.
The international experience indicates that even when inflation bands with hard edges have been introduced, subsequent changes in the central bank's policy framework and communications have tended to soften the edges of the inflation band.
The Reserve Bank Act requires that price stability be defined in a specific and public contract, negotiated between the Minister of Finance and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Under the act, the Governor of the Reserve Bank is personally accountable for keeping inflation in line with the stated objective.
(Indeed, the Governor could be fired for failing to do so.)  Since 1990, price stability has been defined in terms of a band for the inflation rate.
Over the following decade, the Reserve Bank treated this band as having hard edges, both in its conduct of policy and in its communications with the public; indeed, the boundaries of the inflation band were occasionally referred to as "electric fences" (Sherwin, 1999).
However, it became increasingly evident that the Reserve Bank's vigorous attempts to keep inflation within the band tended to generate destabilizing fluctuations in nominal interest rates and undesirable outcomes for the broader macroeconomy.
Given the dissatisfaction with that approach, the Reserve Bank's mandate was refined significantly in 1997, namely, in seeking to keep inflation within the band, the Reserve Bank should avoid "unnecessary instability" in output, interest rates, and the exchange rate (Sherwin, 1999).
 This refinement allowed the Reserve Bank to lengthen the time horizon for achieving the inflation goal, thereby reducing the need to respond to transitory price fluctuations and providing greater flexibility in promoting the goal of macroeconomic stability.
And since the edges of the inflation band have been softened, the Reserve Bank has placed greater emphasis on the policy actions needed to bring inflation toward the midpoint of the band over the forecast horizon.15
The desire to anchor inflation expectations more firmly led the United Kingdom to move from a range to a point objective for inflation.
Three weeks after the United Kingdom departed from the European Exchange Rate Mechanism in the fall of 1992, the Chancellor of the Exchequer announced an inflation objective of 1 to 4 percent, which was to be achieved by the middle of 1997.
The use of a range for the inflation objective was interpreted by many as a way of limiting the extent of discretionary policy and of acknowledging the extent of imperfect control over inflation (Bernanke and others, 1999, p.
The initial target range of 1 to 4 percent was often perceived as a range of indifference, which implied that inflation just outside the range would be viewed as qualitatively different from inflation just inside the range.
As a consequence, inflation tended to stay near the upper border of the range.
This modification of the policy framework was well received by financial markets and the general public, and surveys of households and professional forecasters indicated that inflation expectations converged fairly quickly to the Bank of England's point objective.16
The importance of anchoring expectations helps explain why other central banks that initially adopted an inflation objective stated in terms of a range‑‑even a narrow one‑‑increasingly emphasized a single value in their communications or have replaced the range with a point objective.
 For example, in May 2003 the European Central Bank (ECB) clarified that in implementing its mandate of price stability, monetary policy would be aimed at maintaining inflation "below, but close to, 2 percent in the medium term"  (European Central Bank, 2003).
That clarification was welcomed by market participants and likely made it easier for the ECB to anchor inflation expectations.
As a final example, consider the evolution of the monetary policy framework in Canada.
In the late 1990s, this framework was well described as a range with relatively hard edges because statements by Bank of Canada officials had consistently indicated that the boundaries of the target zone (which ranged from 1 to 3 percent) were to be taken more seriously than the midpoint (Bernanke and others, 1999).
Over the past decade, however, the conduct of monetary policy has evolved in the direction of placing greater emphasis on the midpoint, while the range has been used mainly as a communication device rather than as an objective in itself.
I have argued today that the science of monetary policy provides a strong rationale for framing the inflation goal in terms of a specific point objective rather than as a range or comfort zone.17  First of all, I've argued inflation should be low but not too low.
Second, I've provided a brief review of lessons from economic theory that can inform policymakers in their choice of inflation objectives.
Third, I've outlined what we can learn from the practical experiences of other industrial economies; indeed, in recent years, a number of foreign central banks have moved toward emphasizing the midpoint of an inflation range or have provided a specific point objective for inflation.
Finally, you may have noticed that I haven't said much about the United States in this speech.
Nevertheless, the issues that I've discussed today have potentially important implications for the ongoing process of refining the Federal Reserve's policy framework and of enhancing our communications.
Indeed, as Chairman Bernanke has recently indicated, our communication strategy is "a work in progress," and the Federal Reserve "will continue to look for ways to improve the accountability and public understanding of U.S.

Table 1:  Major Industrial Economies with Explicit Inflation Objectives

"Near-Rational Wage and Price Setting and the Long-Run Phillips Curve ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol.
"The Economic Outlook," speech delivered at a Finance Committee luncheon of the Executives' Club of Chicago, Chicago, March 8.
"Federal Reserve Communications," speech delivered at the Cato Institute 25th Annual Monetary Conference, Washington, November 14.
"Price Stability and Monetary Policy Effectiveness when Nominal Interest Rates are Bounded at Zero ," Advances in Macroeconomics, Berkeley Electronic Press, vol.
"Zero Bound on Interest Rates and Optimal Monetary Policy ," Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol.
"Policy Options in a Liquidity Trap,"  American Economic Review, vol.
Washington:  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May.
Background Studies for the ECB's Evaluation of its Monetary Policy Strategy (1.82 MB PDF) .
"Robustness and Real Consequences of Nominal Wage Rigidity ," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"The Costs and Benefits of Going from Low Inflation to Price Stability," in Christina Romer and David Romer, eds., Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy.
"The New Neoclassical Synthesis and the Role of Monetary Policy," in Ben S.
"Chairman's Remarks:  Transparency in Monetary Policy (30 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of St.
"Firms' Wage Adjustments:  A Break from the Past (811 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of St.
81 (May/June, Labor Markets and Macroeconomics:  Proceedings of the Twenty-Third Annual Economic Policy Conference of the Federal Reserve Bank of St.
"How Much Inflation is Necessary to Grease the Wheels?" mimeo, September.
"Are Japanese Nominal Wages Downwardly Rigid? (Part I): Examinations of Nominal Wage Change Distributions ," Monetary and Economics Studies, Bank of Japan, vol.
"Are Japanese Nominal Wages Downwardly Rigid? (Part II): Examinations Using a Friction Model ," Monetary and Economics Studies, Bank of Japan, vol.
"Downward Nominal Wage Rigidity:  Evidence from the Employment Cost Index ," Advances in Macroeconomics, Berkeley Electronic Press, vol.
"Inflation Targeting in Emerging-Market Countries ," American Economic Review, vol.
"Monetary Policy and the Dual Mandate," speech delivered at Bridgewater College, Bridgewater, Va., April 10.
"Will Monetary Policy Become More of a Science?" Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-44.
Washington:  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September.
"The Federal Reserve's Enhanced Communication Strategy and the Science of Monetary Policy," speech delivered to the Undergraduate Economics Association, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, Mass., November 29.
"Does Stabilizing Inflation Contribute to Stabilizing Economic Activity?" speech delivered at East Carolina University's Beta Gamma Sigma Distinguished Lecture Series, Greenville, N.C., February 25.
"Inflation Band Targeting and Optimal Inflation Contracts ," National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
"Three Lessons for Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Era ," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
34 (November, Part 2: Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation Environment), pp.
"Strategic Choices in Inflation Targeting:  The New Zealand Experience ," Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Reserve Bank Bulletin, vol.
"Real Implications of the Zero Bound on Nominal Interest Rates ," Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, vol.
Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy.
"Enhancing Fed Credibility," speech delivered at the Annual Washington Policy Conference, sponsored by the National Association for Business Economics, Washington, March 13.

Indeed, this specification of monetary policy objectives is exactly what is suggested by the dual mandate that the Congress has given to the Federal Reserve to promote both price stability and maximum employment (Mishkin, 2007a, 2008).
For example, former Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan (2002) stated that "price stability is best thought of as an environment in which inflation is so low and stable over time that it does not materially enter into the decisions of households and firms." Return to text
Over the past couple of decades, an extensive literature has analyzed the benefits of low average inflation in a so-called New Keynesian framework.
Interestingly, the larger the burden coming from the interaction of inflation and the capital income tax, the more government tax revenues will fall when inflation is reduced.
Feldstein (1997, 1999) provides a quantitative assessment of the benefits of price stability based on the interaction of inflation and the tax system, showing that a lower average inflation rate stimulates investment by reducing the effective tax on capital income.
Because real money balances bear no interest, the opportunity cost of holding them is the nominal rate of interest.
Higher inflation then leads to higher nominal interest rates, and hence lowers real balances, which causes a welfare loss because the social cost of producing real balances has remained substantially unaffected.
In the absence of other frictions in the economy, inflation is viewed in this class of models as a tax on real balances (Bailey, 1956; Friedman 1969).
However, the costs from higher holdings of real money balances has arguably become much less relevant as our economy has become more financially sophisticated.
The main idea can be described as follows:  During periods of low productivity growth and no inflation, firms that need to cut their relative wages can do so only by cutting money wages.
In the presence of downward nominal wage rigidities, firms will keep relative wages too high and employment too low.
Hence, very low rates of inflation might prevent real wages from adjusting downward in response to declining labor demand in certain industries or regions, thereby leading to increased unemployment and hindering the re-allocation of labor from declining sectors to expanding sectors.
Research by staff at the Federal Reserve Board has found evidence that downward nominal wage rigidities exist in the United States (Estevao and Wilson, 1998; Lebow, Saks, and Wilson, 2003).
However, the evidence for the mechanism through which low inflation raises the natural rate of unemployment is not at all clear cut.
Inflation not only can "grease" the labor market and thus allow downward shifts in real wages in response to a decline in demand along, but it can also put friction in the system ("sand") by increasing the noise in relative real wages (Groshen and Schweitzer, 1999).
See Kuroda and Yamamoto (2003) for analysis of the Japanese experience, Fehr and Goette (2005) for analysis of the Swiss experience, and Kim and Ruge-Murcia (2007) for macroeconometric analysis of the implications of downward nominal wage rigidity for the United States.
The fact that the deflation is anticipated does not completely rule out a negative effect on balance sheets:   If the debt is sufficiently long-lived, there still is some redistribution from debtors to creditors.
Although these considerations are important for the design of monetary policy, a central bank can make use of other policy tools if the policy rate does become constrained by the zero lower bound (Bernanke, 2002).
The term "comfort zone" appeared in the headline of a September 2002 New York Times interview with former Federal Reserve Governor Laurence Meyer (Stevenson, 2002) and has subsequently been used by Federal Reserve officials on numerous occasions, including prominent speeches by Bernanke (2005) and Yellen (2006).
Mishkin (2000) considers the experiences of a number of emerging market economies that have adopted explicit inflation objectives.
Bernanke and others (1999) countered this line of reasoning by noting that "missing an entire range may be perceived by the public as more serious failure of policy than missing a point, or even a narrow band, (which happens almost inevitably), leading to a possible loss of credibility." Return to text
Since the early 1990s, the Reserve Bank of Australia's objective has been to keep the average inflation rate within a range of 2 percent to 3 percent; thus, when the edges of New Zealand's official inflation band were softened, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand described the move as a transition in the direction of an Australian-style "thick point" (Sherwin, 1999).
From 1992 through 2003, the Bank of England's inflation objective was defined in terms of the retail price index excluding mortgage interest (RPIX).
government announced that the official inflation objective would henceforth be defined in terms of the consumer price index (CPI) and that the target would be set at 2 percent, a choice reflecting the fact that the recent average for CPI inflation had been about 1/2 percentage point lower than that of RPIX inflation.
Further discussion regarding the scientific approach to monetary policy is in Mishkin (2007b).

At the National Community Reinvestment Coalition Annual Meeting, Washington, D.C.
This audience, the National Community Reinvestment Coalition, is certainly aware that mortgage delinquency and foreclosure rates have increased substantially over the past year and a half.
At the end of last year, more than one in five of the roughly 3.6 million outstanding subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs) were seriously delinquent, meaning they were either in foreclosure or ninety days or more past due.1 That rate is about four times higher than it was in mid-2005.
And, looking toward the future, they challenge us to ensure a regulatory environment that promotes responsible lending and sustainable homeownership.
Then I would like to share with you what the Federal Reserve is doing to reduce foreclosures, to protect aspiring homeowners from unfair and deceptive practices, and to equip them to choose wisely from among the often confusing array of mortgage options.
Responsible subprime lending expanded credit to borrowers with imperfect or limited credit histories.
Mortgage performance data show a strong correlation between adverse house price changes and subsequent increases in mortgage delinquency and foreclosure (Avery, Brevoort, and Canner, 2007; Gerardi, Shapiro, and Willen, 2007).
Indeed, the role of investors in the housing market has increased markedly over time.
Mortgage delinquencies are also tied to local economic conditions; notably, several midwestern states struggling with job losses and slow income growth have seen increased delinquencies.
The deterioration in underwriting standards that appears to have begun in late 2005 is another important factor underlying the current crisis.
A large share of subprime loans that were originated during this time featured high combined loan-to-value ratios and, in some cases, layers of additional risk factors, such as a lack of full documentation or the acceptance of very high debt-to-income ratios.
In 2006, for example, the HMDA data suggest that nearly 40 percent of higher-priced home-purchase loans involved a piggy-back loan or second mortgage.3 Indeed, many defaults are occurring within the first few months of origination, well before payment resets occur on subprime ARM products.
Much of the weakening in underwriting standards appears to have happened outside of institutions regulated by the federal banking agencies.
The HMDA data for 2006 show that more than 45 percent of high-cost first mortgages were originated by independent mortgage companies, which are institutions that are not regulated by the federal banking agencies and that sell almost all of the mortgages they originate.
In this instance, this originate-to-distribute model appears to have contributed to the breakdown in underwriting standards, as lenders often found themselves able to pass on the credit risk without much resistance from the ultimate investors.
Another concern is the substantial number of borrowers with subprime ARMs whose interest rates are scheduled to reset upward--about 1.5 million in 2008.4 The problem posed by resets is serious, but it may be mitigated somewhat by lower short-term interest rates and by the efforts of servicers, including those working with the Hope Now Alliance, to find solutions for borrowers facing resets, including interest-rate freezes (Hope Now Alliance Servicers, 2008).
In addition, the FHASecure plan, which the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) announced late last summer, offers qualified borrowers who are delinquent because of an interest rate reset and who have some equity in the home the opportunity to refinance into an FHA-insured mortgage.
The current high rate of delinquencies and foreclosures is not confined to the subprime market.
Across market segments, delinquencies are rising fastest on the more-complex loans originated over the past few years.
In some cases, borrowers may not have fully understood the details of their loans, including the potential for large payment increases.
Thus, as these problems in housing emerged and deepened, the Federal Reserve System engaged with a wide array of market participants--including lenders, community groups, servicers, consumer advocates, public officials, and other regulators--to properly diagnose the problems and work toward sustainable solutions.
The Federal Reserve System alone, of course, cannot resolve all of the problems in the marketplace, but we have responded thus far through our regulatory, supervisory, research, and community affairs functions.
As part of a periodic review of our regulations under HOEPA, the Federal Reserve Board in 2006 began a systematic look at changes in the mortgage industry.
Four public hearings held around the country confirmed evidence that we were gathering from other sources that the mortgage market was undergoing the significant changes with which we are all now familiar.
Our concerns led us in 2006 and 2007 to issue, along with other federal and state regulators, a series of guidances to the institutions we supervise that covered nontraditional mortgage loans, subprime lending, and servicing practices.
Those were good steps, but we also recognized that many of the problems we were beginning to see were a result of actions by companies and individuals not subject to our supervisory oversight.
Significantly, bans on such unfair or deceptive acts and practices would apply to the entire mortgage industry, not just to institutions directly regulated by the Board.
Our goal was to produce clear and comprehensive rules to protect consumers from unfair practices while maintaining the viability of a market for responsible mortgage lending.
The rules would apply stricter regulations to higher-priced mortgage loans, which we have defined broadly so as to cover substantially all of the subprime market.5 The regulations would be enforceable by state and federal supervisory and enforcement agencies as well as by consumers themselves, who could recover statutory damages for violations above and beyond actual damages.
Consequently, we would require lenders to verify the income or assets they rely on to make credit decisions for higher-priced loans--standard industry practice, in fact, for most lending until quite recently.
This rule would help ensure that borrowers can afford their payments and avoid the cases in which borrowers, especially first-time borrowers, did not understand that the monthly principal and interest payment was not the only financial obligation associated with homeownership.
Brokers would also have to disclose their potential conflict of interest.
We do believe, however, that this proposal will give consumers much better information and raise their awareness of brokers' potential conflict of interest while reducing a broker's incentive to steer a consumer to a higher rate.
Under our rules, for example, mortgage originators would not be allowed to advertise a mortgage as having a "fixed" rate unless the advertisement also states clearly how long the rate or payment is fixed, and they could not advertise loans in one language but have important consumer disclosures in another.
Regulatory oversight of mortgage lending has become more challenging as the breadth and depth of this market has grown over the past decade.
Other changes, such as the increased role of nonbank mortgage lenders, have added complexity.
To achieve more uniformly effective supervision, the Federal Reserve, together with other federal and state agencies, launched a pilot program last summer to conduct reviews of selected nondepository lenders with significant subprime mortgage operations.
These reviews will evaluate the companies' underwriting standards as well as senior management oversight of compliance with state and federal consumer protection regulations and laws.
We plan to use this joint project as a vehicle for strengthening cooperation and coordination among federal and state agencies.
The Federal Reserve is addressing the foreclosure crisis in capacities other than that of a regulator, leveraging our strengths in research and data analysis, our regional presence, and the many contacts we have developed with local community groups, lenders, policymakers, and other stakeholders in this issue.
Community affairs officers at the Board and the twelve Reserve Banks work with Federal Reserve research economists to anticipate and, where possible, mitigate foreclosure problems.
They share detailed reports and information that help community organizations, nonprofits, state regulators, and others identify regions and neighborhoods most vulnerable to foreclosure and respond accordingly.
Solid analysis of available information is critical to crafting appropriate policy remedies, and the Federal Reserve has invested considerable resources into such studies.
For example, a Federal Reserve Bank of Boston working paper has analyzed the factors that predict foreclosure, finding a particularly important role for declining house prices (Gerardi, Shapiro, and Willen, 2007).
The Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia is conducting a five-year study of pre-purchase homeownership counseling.
That study will provide important information on the benefits of counseling services in fostering sustainable homeownership and help us understand the long-term effects of financial-management skills on the credit worthiness of low- and moderate-income homebuyers.
In addition to this ongoing research, the Federal Reserve is supporting efforts to reach troubled borrowers and to raise awareness in communities about ways to prevent foreclosures.
Since July, the community affairs offices across the Federal Reserve System have sponsored or cosponsored more than fifty events related to foreclosures, reaching more than 4,000 attendees including lenders, counselors, community development specialists, and policymakers.
Consumers going through foreclosure typically will see their credit scores drop, raising longer-term questions about their ability to rebound financially and perhaps pursue a more sustainable home purchase at some later point.
Because vacant homes, in particular, impose real costs on neighborhood and communities, forward-looking strategies to keep these homes occupied are important (Apgar and Duda, 2005).
Some efforts are underway to prevent vacancies, as well as return vacant properties to active use; some of these efforts may also help preserve the supply of affordable housing in areas that have experienced shortages.7 The Federal Reserve has recently undertaken a joint effort with NeighborWorks America to help communities develop strategies for neighborhood stabilization.
It is clear that rising home foreclosures and delinquencies significantly challenge many consumers and communities, and I hope I have conveyed today that the Federal Reserve is strongly committed to fully employing our authority, expertise, and resources to help alleviate their distress.
We will continue to collaborate at the national, regional, and local levels with other stakeholders in the public, private, and nonprofit sectors to help to avoid preventable foreclosures and to address the consequences of the foreclosures that occur.
 "Subprime Outcomes: Risky Mortgages, Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures," Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Paper 07-15.
 Analysis based on Reuters/University of Michigan Surveys of Consumers data provided to the Federal Reserve Board.
 The Federal Reserve Board staff estimates are based on 2006 HMDA data.
 Additional information is available on the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council website or in the December 2007 Federal Reserve Bulletin.
 The Federal Reserve Board's staff calculations are based on data from First American LoanPerformance and the Mortgage Bankers Association.
 Under the proposal, a "higher-priced mortgage loan" would have an annual percentage rate that exceeds the yield on comparable Treasury securities by 3 percentage points or more for first-lien loans or 5 percentage points or more for subordinate-lien loans.
 A YSP is the present dollar value of the difference between the lowest interest rate the wholesale lenders would have accepted on a particular transaction and the interest rate the broker actually obtained for the lender.
 For example, the Neighborhood Housing Services Redevelopment Corporation in Chicago has acquired hundreds of abandoned properties from such sources as the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the City of Chicago, bank foreclosures (that is, real estate owned), and private owners.
 For example, in Flint, Michigan, the Genesee County Land Bank acquires vacant properties through tax liens (see www.thelandbank.org).

It is a pleasure to be addressing the new American Bankers Association, which has arisen from the successful merger of America's Community Bankers and the ABA.
Your association truly represents the full range of banks in the United States.
The focus of my remarks today--the importance of fundamentals in risk management--should still resonate with all of you, whether you are part of a large global bank or a smaller community bank.
Unfortunately, recent market events have shown us that banking institutions still face some risk management challenges, including a need to refocus on some key fundamentals.
The good news, however, is that we also have many examples of sound risk management practices during the recent disruptions.
Getting the fundamentals right--and being ever vigilant about their consistent application and execution--forms the basis of any sound risk management system.
I am not trying to imply that implementing risk management fundamentals is easy; that is, just because something is fundamental does not mean that it comes naturally.
In fact, there are a number of risk management challenges inherent in banking that require careful identification and attention.
One of the most basic risk management challenges relates to concentration of risks.
As risk management techniques grew over the centuries, bankers became more adept at identifying, measuring, and managing risk concentrations, but that does not mean the original problem presented by concentrations--that losses could occur all at the same time--has vanished.
It is also important to note that concentrations in banking include not just basic lending, but also holding securities, trading complex instruments, providing liquidity facilities, engaging in off-balance sheet transactions, and conducting other financial activities.
As banks have extended their range of activities and involvement in new markets, they must be particularly mindful of potential for concentrations of risk to arise for a number of reasons.
First, any new activity will be less familiar and involve less data and experience for evaluating risk compared with long-standing activities or markets.
Second, risk concentrations can be hidden during normal times and may only manifest themselves during times of stress when activities or instruments that might in normal times have little or negative correlation suddenly become correlated, such as with a market-wide increase in the demand for liquidity as we have seen recently.
Understanding the linkage between risk concentrations and capital is especially important, since the concentration of risk of a given portfolio markedly affects the amount of capital that should be held against it.
Heavy concentrations can produce so-called fat tails in a loss distribution, meaning that considerably higher capital levels are required to support the risk taken.
If one underestimates the amount of capital needed to be held against risk concentrations and/or the extent of the concentrations themselves, then a banker would realize that the initial level of capital was not sufficient and that remedial actions would need to be taken.
Naturally, both large and small banks can continue to be successful and profitable by having some lending or other types of concentrations, but they need to be aware of the risks involved and have the proper risk management and capital to support those concentrations.
I would now like to elaborate on three key risk management fundamentals and their relationship to concentrations of risk in banking: Governance and risk control; risk identification and measurement; and liquidity risk management.
In doing so, I will highlight some important findings from a report released last week by a group of supervisory agencies from France, Germany, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the United States, known as the Senior Supervisors Group or SSG.1 The report, "Observations on Risk Management Practices during the Recent Market Turbulence," provides a summary and analysis of a joint survey and review, initiated last autumn, of risk management practices to understand how different approaches fared during the recent financial stress.
Although the analysis covered a group of the largest banking and securities firms, the lessons learned actually have relevance for all financial institutions of all sizes and scope--even those that have thus far not suffered from recent financial turbulence.
I will also discuss a few other examples of supervisory activities, such as our recent guidance on commercial real estate concentrations, from which we have learned valuable lessons.
I will start with perhaps one of the most fundamental aspects of risk management at banking organizations--in fact, at any organization: governance and controls.
Clearly, senior management must take on a very active and involved role in risk management.
As supervisors, governance and controls is a key feature we look at in assessing risk management at an institution.
For example, we have seen some evidence that information was kept in silos within firms and not adequately distributed both vertically and horizontally within certain firms.
It meant that managers were not fully aware of the extent to which the risks of the different activities undertaken by the firm could, first, become correlated in times of stress and, second, result in high concentrations of risk exposures.
To be quite specific, in particular cases, senior management was not fully aware of the firm's latent concentrations to U.S.
subprime mortgages, because they did not realize that in addition to the subprime mortgages on their books, they had exposure through off-balance sheet vehicles holding mortgages, through claims on counterparties exposed to subprime, and through certain complex securities.
Effective risk management remains sturdy and durable only if supported by strong and independent risk functions that produce unbiased information.
Empowering independent risk managers results in clear, dispassionate thinking about the entire firm's risk profile, with no favoritism toward any business unit.
Senior managers should encourage risk managers to dig deep to uncover not only risks within each business unit, but also risk concentrations that can arise from the set of activities undertaken by the firm as a whole as well as latent risks--such as hidden risk concentrations that can arise from correlation of risk in times of stress.
Such risk management assessments should lead risk managers to point out cases in which certain business lines are assuming too much risk.
In other words, it is good to have a few people within the institution who--to paraphrase a former Federal Reserve Chairman--know when to take away the punch bowl.
Being the party pooper, however, can be very difficult in any organization, and that is why it is crucial for the risk manager to be known as an independent voice who is influential with top management and for top executives, of large or small firms, to set the appropriate "tone at the top" with respect to the importance of independent and unbiased risk evaluation.
As I discussed in detail at a speech before the Global Association of Risk Professionals a couple of weeks ago, any successful organization needs to develop appropriate mechanisms to ensure adherence to, and sustainability of, its risk management.2 Incentive structures are a key mechanism for this purpose.
Such controls provide incentives for business-line leaders to assume only the risks that the firm can absorb because they penalize those who try to take on excessive risk or inadequate mitigation in the name of maximizing short-term profit.
This is just as true at large international firms as it is at community banks.
The second fundamental of sound risk management relates to risk identification and measurement.
Timely and accurate information is the lifeblood of sound risk management.
The SSG report, for example, noted that some firms could not easily integrate market and counterparty risk positions across risks types, making it difficult for their executives to identify concentrations across the entire firm.
Aggregating information about risk exposures and the concentration of risks may not be as challenging at smaller institutions, but checking the timeliness and veracity of the data is important at institutions of all sizes.
In other words, risk managers should live by the adage "Trust but verify," being careful not to rely on assessments or data from others without conducting proper due diligence.
It is also worth noting that financial institutions should gather a wide range of relevant information before they see market troubles brewing.
Understanding a firm's true risk exposures requires examining not just risks on the balance sheet, but also off-balance-sheet risks that are sometimes more difficult to identify and often not so easy to quantify.
Latent risks from certain complex products and certain risky activities should be properly recognized, because they can manifest themselves when market turbulence sets in.
As the SSG report indicates, some firms had a poor understanding of the risks inherent in certain complex products or failed to recognize that certain activities contained latent risks that could be manifest in unexpected concentrations of risk exposures when market turbulence arose.
For example, we witnessed some lapses in credit risk identification and measurement when, as I noted, certain institutions underestimated the actual credit risk of subprime mortgages and the secondary or tertiary effects brought on by disruptions in subprime markets for their broader set of activities.
Stress testing and scenario analysis are of paramount importance, since they can reveal potential concentrations of risk that may not be apparent from using information gleaned from normal times.
After on-the-ground supervisors reported seeing increases in CRE concentrations at many institutions across the country, supervisors examined historical data on risks associated with CRE concentrations to provide the basis for developing supervisory guidance.
That guidance counseled banking organizations with high CRE exposures relative to capital to engage in stress testing to evaluate behavior of those exposures and the impact on capital in adverse circumstances.
Some financial institutions already employ stress tests, but they should re-check their robustness in light of recent events.
For example, banking organizations might benefit from expanding tests to include a wider set of variables to stress and to consider shocks they might have considered much less probable one or two years ago.
Banks should also remember that past experience is not always predictive of future events, meaning that they should be somewhat creative in designing potential shocks.
In CRE, for example, banks should move beyond considering single-name risk and include scenarios involving broader risks to the CRE sector and how such risk may be correlated in times of stress with other parts of the portfolio.
Firms should have greater motivation for applying proper valuation practices as part of good risk management.3 At the center of these practices is the ability to make appropriate judgments about the quality of information being used for valuations.
The process usually starts with an initial experimentation phase in which market participants learn a great deal about the product's expected performance and risk characteristics, preferably under different market conditions.
Market participants must ensure that they do not make valuation decisions based solely on excessive reliance of external ratings or evaluations, but that they also undertake their own assessment.
And I would suggest that the value of independent due diligence on the part of market participants is especially high for newer and more-complex products.
Encouragingly, we have examples of some firms recognizing the potential risks of broad market disruptions, for example, if there were dramatic and unexpected price movements, or if market illiquidity set in.
Those firms faring better typically use a number of tools to assess risk positions that draw on differing underlying assumptions.
Such tools provide management with more information and different perspectives on its potential risk exposures.
In the best cases, the tools are flexible enough to allow perspectives on risk to change as business conditions change.
For example, they can help identify when risk concentrations are changing as a result of market movements or changes in counterparty positions.
Banks, of course, have been managing expected liquidity demands since the beginning of banking itself.
4 Because of its central role in the business of banking, liquidity risk requires rigorous and effective management.
Naturally, financial institutions both large and small must pay careful attention to liquidity risks, even if they manifest themselves in different ways.
Regarding recent events, a number of financial firms were surprised by the extent of market disruptions and were forced to take funding actions not anticipated in their contingency funding plans, including some decisions to support affiliates that were based on reputational concerns rather than contractual obligations.
At the same time, some institutions were able to avoid more serious problems from these events by aligning treasury functions more closely with risk-management processes and incorporating information from all businesses into global liquidity planning, including actual and contingent liquidity risk.
They also made attempts to embed market liquidity premia or apply market liquidity haircuts in pricing models and valuations.
Recent events have shown that during times of systemwide stress, liquidity shocks can become correlated so that the same factors that can lead to liquidity problems for the bank's assets or off-balance sheet vehicles can simultaneously put pressure on banks' own funding liquidity.
Again, we see the trouble that risk concentrations can cause if an institution has not tried to identify them in advance and take steps to mitigate their effects.
As with other risk areas, supervisors suggest extensive use of firm-wide stress testing to ensure the incorporation of low-probability but potentially severe liquidity events that may have the potential to converge.
Smaller banks, as well as large, global banks, should conduct liquidity stress tests to evaluate what could happen to liquidity positions in times of stress.
We have also noticed the potential for liquidity risk to have an impact on capital adequacy.
As you are well aware, several large global banks ended up having to deal with so-called unplanned asset expansions arising from a variety of liquidity stresses related to the asset side of the balance sheet.
In a few cases, these unexpected increases in the balance sheet created some pressures on capital ratios, even if the level of capital remained stable.
Although bank liquidity management and capital management may be conceptually distinct, recent events illustrate in practice how liquidity management and capital management are intimately related, particularly in times of financial stress.
Since risk concentrations have the potential to manifest themselves during times of stress and at that time adversely affect capital positions, it is particularly important that firms assess how liquidity events could place pressure on capital levels.
In a nutshell: liquidity problems always have the potential to affect bank balance sheets and, in doing so, bank capital adequacy.
As I noted at the outset, the current financial market turbulence underscores the importance of getting the fundamentals of sound risk management right and being ever vigilant about their consistent application, execution, and improvement in light of new data and experiences.
I have highlighted the importance of three fundamentals--governance and risk control; risk identification and measurement; and liquidity risk management--and the SSG report provides evidence that those institutions taking care to get these fundamentals right generally performed better during recent events than other institutions.
Concentrations of risk can pose challenges to financial institutions, and top managers must be aware of their potential and have a risk management system in place ready to deal with them.
This is true not only for large global players but also for small-and medium-sized banks, as my discussion of the CRE concentration guidance emphasized.
For instance, we need to be careful that lending is conducted on a prudent basis, and at the same time, take care not to stifle the provision of credit when it is done properly.
Before concluding, I would like to mention a topic in supervision and regulation that I have not yet touched upon in these remarks, namely, credit cards.
As you know, the Federal Reserve has proposed new rules under Regulation Z, which implements the Truth in Lending Act, regarding open-end credit to require new, more informative, and consumer-tested disclosures by credit card issuers and expects to propose new rules for credit cards under the Federal Reserve's unfair and deceptive acts and practices authority.
To help us better assess the current state of the credit card market and possible challenges in credit card markets for consumers and others involved in those markets, I have invited key credit card market participants--card issuers and processors, consumer advocates, counseling agencies, and other regulatory agencies--to participate in a forum hosted by the Federal Reserve Board on April 8.
 The report is available at: http://www.newyorkfed.org/newsevents/news/banking/2008/rp080306.html Return to text
Kroszner, 2008, "Improving Risk Management in Light of Recent Market Events," speech delivered at the Global Association of Risk Management Professionals Annual Risk Convention, New York, February 25.
Kroszner, 2007, "Innovation, Information, and Regulation in Financial Markets," speech delivered at the Philadelphia Fed Policy Forum, Philadelphia, November 30.
Kroszner (2008), "Liquidity-Risk Management in the Business of Banking," speech delivered at the Institute of International Bankers, Washington, DC, March 3.

At the International Symposium of the Banque de France, Paris, France
He is right that globalization has not fundamentally changed the way central banks should do business.
Although production chains and capital markets are more integrated across countries than before, and gross trade flows now account for a larger share of gross domestic product (GDP) in most nations, the dynamics of aggregate output and inflation remain at least qualitatively the same.
Accordingly, central banks should continue to conduct monetary policy in the same forward-looking manner as they have for the past twenty years or so, adjusting policy rates in response to current and expected future movements in output and inflation, taking account of the lags in monetary policy.
When exchange rates are free to adjust, this general approach to policymaking has proven effective in fostering macroeconomic stability over time in many countries.1
In my remarks, I will expand on another of John's points--namely, that monetary policy making has been complicated by globalization, particularly by rising trade volumes and increased capital market integration.
For one thing, globalization has likely made the domestic economy more sensitive to foreign shocks, so central banks must now pay more attention to events around the globe.
And, the integration of China and other countries into the world market economy has expanded the scale and complexity of the foreign developments that central banks must monitor.
Finally, globalization has probably made the link between policy actions and economic outcomes more uncertain by, among other things, strengthening the role of the exchange rate in the monetary policy transmission mechanism.
Those price increases have raised inflation worldwide while accentuating already weakening growth prospects in some countries in recent months.
In recent years, potential constraints on the expansion of supply, especially of petroleum, have played a role.
But in addition, the emergence of China, India, and other industrializing Asian economies as major consumers of oil and other raw materials has complicated the analysis, partly because these countries exert such a strong influence on global markets and partly because the structure of their economies is changing so rapidly.
Disentangling the various global forces influencing commodity prices can be useful in assessing the implications of those prices for domestic output and inflation, and hence monetary policy.
For example, it matters whether a rise in oil prices results from demand factors, such as stronger global real activity, or supply factors, such as a hurricane that shuts down production.
For an oil-importing country, a demand-driven price increase would have less negative implications for domestic real activity than a supply-driven increase because an expanding world economy would help boost demand for the country's exports.
For the United States, however, a rise in oil prices driven by stronger real Chinese activity would not necessarily lead U.S.
export volumes to rise substantially, given the low propensity of China to import from the United States.
Policymakers focus on the inflation outlook, and so we need to consider what global forces imply for the future when assessing the inflation consequences of rising commodity prices.
Will prices for crude oil and other commodities continue to rise rapidly in the face of robust growth in China and other newly industrializing economies? Or do current prices on the spot and futures markets already fully incorporate the likelihood of continued growth in those economies, in which case prices would remain near their current level? In the first scenario, climbing energy prices, for example, would continue to boost headline inflation directly and would indirectly boost non-energy prices through higher costs of production; moreover, a continuing rise in oil prices might potentially threaten the stability of long-run inflation expectations and nominal wage demands.
In contrast, a flattening out of oil prices would restrain overall inflation, directly by stabilizing a key component of energy prices and indirectly by ceasing to put upward pressure on inflation through pass-through and expectational effects.
Because monetary policy has a limited ability to counter short-term price surprises, the distinction between transitory and persistent influences on inflation from oil and other factors is critical.
Doing so could have important implications for the stance of monetary policy--all the more so if we expected rising energy costs to lead to higher inflation expectations and elevated wage gains.
Surprised as we have been by the rapid, extended run-up in energy costs over the past few years, one would think that the price of a storable commodity such as oil should already embody expectations of continued rapid growth in the developing economies.
However, the large run-up in spot and futures prices in recent weeks indicates that market participants are still revising their views of long-term demand-supply conditions.
In these circumstances, policymakers must be mindful of the uncertainties surrounding the outlook for commodity prices and the risk that past or future increases in these goods could yet embed themselves in higher long-run inflation expectations and a persistently faster rate of overall price increases.
Besides these complications, globalization has made the workings of the monetary policy transmission mechanism more unpredictable.
For one, the determination of asset prices is now more dependent on conditions in financial markets worldwide, making the link between domestic policy actions and movements in the prices of bonds or equities more uncertain.
For example, the correlation of quarterly changes in the federal funds rate with the variation in U.S.
To be sure, the falling correlation probably reflects a variety of factors, possibly including more systematic and predictable monetary policies.
But global financial markets also seem to have played a role; as Chairman Bernanke has pointed out, savings from abroad, especially Asia, appear to have held down intermediate and longer-term U.S.
interest rates from 2004 to 2006 even as monetary policy was tightened.
As we have seen in recent months, the increased integration of financial markets has also facilitated the transmission and amplification across borders of many shocks, such as changes in the perceived riskiness of certain assets and the compensation required to hold them.
The role of the exchange rate is another complication that has only grown with globalization.
Of course, flexible exchange rates make it possible for central banks to achieve their domestic economic objectives.
But the exchange rate is a notoriously difficult asset price to predict, and its response to any particular policy action is highly uncertain, as we found, for example, in 2001, when aggressive rate cutting in the United States was accompanied by a strengthening in the dollar.
Even with an apparent decline in the pass-through of exchange rates into import prices, the increase in trade volumes arising from globalization has presumably boosted the relative importance of the exchange rate in the economy, thereby strengthening an unpredictable factor in the monetary policy transmission mechanism.
Despite the increased openness of the domestic economy to foreign shocks and greater uncertainty about the monetary policy transmission mechanism, economic volatility in the United States and other advanced economies has declined.
That stability may be attributable, in part, to the increasing ability of global product and capital markets to buffer the domestic economy against internal shocks.
Because of globalization, net exports likely absorb a greater proportion of downshifts in domestic spending, foreign competition helps discipline domestic price increases, and--as a consequence of greater cross-border holdings of assets--gains and losses on domestic assets are realized in part by foreign investors.
Together with the implementation of better monetary policies in many countries, these particular aspects of globalization likely contributed to the "Great Moderation."
John addresses the question of whether greater economic integration has increased the gains to be had from policy cooperation and coordination.
We have seen an example recently in which policy cooperation of a particular type seemed to pay dividends.
In December, simultaneous and in some cases coordinated actions by a number of central banks to supply liquidity to banks apparently helped relieve stresses in interbank funding markets.
Coordination and cooperation were called for because banks today operate in many markets simultaneously, and pressures in one market can readily spill over to others, especially when the normal channels for arbitrage have been disrupted by financial turmoil.
The Federal Reserve and other central banks are examining the implications of this episode for their methods of supplying liquidity and for responding to future interruptions in the flow of liquidity across markets.
Successful coordination in the provision of liquidity raises the question of whether appreciable gains might be had from coordination of monetary policies more generally.
Gains from formal policy coordination never seemed large, and it is not clear that globalization has increased them appreciably.
Monetary policy should be able to adjust quickly to such changes; agreements that must be renegotiated can tie policymakers' hands.
That does not mean that no circumstances exist in which coordinated monetary policy actions would be beneficial, but such circumstances are probably quite rare.
Ultimately, global stability depends on good performance in individual countries, and the record of recent decades suggests that, in general, good performance is most readily achieved when central banks focus on their own mandates for domestic price stability and growth.
The views expressed are my own and do not necessarily represent those of other members of the Board on the Federal Open Market Committee.Return to text

At the Norges Bank Conference on Monetary Policy, Oslo, Norway
dollar has depreciated over 40 percent against a basket of major currencies, weighted by their countries' trade with the United States.
But how much of a risk to inflation is posed by a depreciation of the domestic currency? This depends on how much of the falling value of the currency is passed through to import prices and then on to overall consumer prices.
In my remarks today, I will discuss what recent economic research tells us about exchange rate pass-through and what this suggests for the control of inflation and monetary policy.
I will first focus on exchange rate pass-through from a macroeconomic perspective and then examine the microeconomic evidence.
In light of this evidence, I will then discuss the implications of exchange rate movements on the conduct of monetary policy.1
There is a long history behind the belief, often expressed in the popular press, that nominal exchange rate depreciation is closely linked to price inflation.
Constitutional Convention of 1787, policymakers recognized that monetary systems without a nominal anchor--that is, systems which relied on paper money not backed by gold or other commodities--were prone to large currency devaluations and high inflation.
The lack of a nominal anchor is one of the reasons the U.S.
Traditional monetary theory regards excessive money creation as a common source of instability in both the exchange rate and price level.
In the presence of large monetary shocks, price inflation and exchange rate depreciation should, therefore, be closely linked.
The large exchange rate depreciation and coincident inflation that occurred following many episodes of wartime suspension of the gold standard--including those in Britain during the Napoleonic Wars and after World War I--were often cited in support of the traditional monetary interpretation (Frenkel, 1976).
Drawing on more recent experience, countries with relatively rapid rates of currency depreciation following the breakup of the Bretton Woods System had relatively high rates of inflation.
For example, Sweden's currency depreciated by an average of 5 percent per year between 1973 and 1985 against the deutsche mark, and its annual inflation rate was on the order of 4 percentage points higher than German inflation over the same period.
In addition, until the past decade, many countries in Latin America were plagued by a combination of chronically high inflation and exchange rate depreciation.
For example, the Mexican peso depreciated by an average of 31 percent per year against the dollar between 1977 and 1995, while the Mexican inflation rate averaged about 30 percent per year higher than the U.S.
The correlation between consumer price inflation and the rate of nominal exchange rate depreciation can indeed be high in an unstable monetary environment in which nominal shocks fuel both high inflation and exchange rate depreciation.
But a salient feature of the data is that this correlation has been very low over the past two decades for a broad group of countries that have pursued stable and predictable monetary policies.
Moreover, the evidence suggests that even countries in which inflation and exchange rate depreciation appear to have been fairly closely linked historically have experienced a sizeable decline in pass-through following the adoption of improved monetary policies.
Some of the most striking macro evidence of a weak correlation between exchange rate depreciation and inflation comes from case studies of episodes in which even highly open economies experienced little upward pressure on inflation following large depreciations of their currencies (Lafleche, 1996/1997; Cunningham and Haldane, 2000; Goldfajn and Werlang 2000; Gagnon, 2004; Burnstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo, 2007).
For example, after Sweden and the United Kingdom's withdrawal from the Exchange Rate Mechanism (ERM) of the European Monetary System in September 1992, both countries experienced low inflation: Swedish price inflation was contained to only 3 percent per year on average in 1993 and 1994 despite a cumulative nominal depreciation of the krona of 9 percent, while the United Kingdom's inflation rate averaged only 2 percent per year in 1993 and 1994 even though the pound fell by 15 percent.2
Over their entire sample, the authors estimated pass-through to be roughly 0.2, indicating that a 10 percent nominal depreciation caused the consumer price level to rise by 2 percent in the long run, with most of it occurring quickly.
However, when they split their sample using country-specific break points--typically during the early 1980s--to control for the effect of switching to a more stable monetary policy regime, they found a marked decline in pass-through.
McCarthy (1999) reached similar conclusions, finding a decline in exchange rate pass-through for all nine of the industrial countries that he examined in the period from 1983 to 1998 relative to the earlier period from 1976 to 1982.3
Indeed, the correlation between consumer price inflation and exchange rate changes is now very low in most industrial countries.
In a previous speech (Mishkin, 2007), I observed that many of the basic facts of the recent behavior of inflation dynamics--less persistence of inflation, a flatter Phillips curve, less responsiveness of inflation to shocks to energy prices and the exchange rate--can all be explained by recognizing that, in recent years, expectations of inflation have become much more solidly anchored.
Traditional monetary theorists were correct in emphasizing that exchange rate depreciation and inflation were likely to be closely linked under an unstable monetary policy environment without a nominal anchor.
But in the context of a stable and predictable monetary policy environment, nominal shocks play a vastly reduced role in driving fluctuations in consumer prices and the exchange rate, so that there is no reason a priori to expect much association between these variables.
Thus, a stable monetary policy--supported by an institutional framework that allows the central bank to pursue a policy independent of fiscal considerations and political pressures--effectively removes an important potential source of high pass-through of exchange rate changes to consumer prices.
Moreover, with expectations of inflation anchored, real shocks arising from various channels--whether from aggregate demand, energy prices, or the foreign exchange rate--will also have a smaller effect on expected inflation and hence on trend inflation.
The presence of a strong commitment to a nominal anchor in many countries--that is, the use of monetary policy actions and statements to maintain low and stable inflation--helps explain why even sizeable depreciations of the nominal exchange rate have exerted small effects on consumer prices in many recent historical episodes and can be expected usually to exert small effects in future episodes.
John Taylor (2002) made this exact point in a well-known paper where he argued that the establishment of a strong nominal anchor in many countries in recent years has led to the very low pass-through of exchange rate depreciation to inflation that we find in the data.
Of course, an important corollary is that low exchange rate pass-through will persist only so long as the monetary authorities continue to ratify the public's expectations that they will continue to respond aggressively to shocks that have potentially persistent adverse effects on inflation.
An important caveat to the conclusion that exchange rate pass-through to consumer price inflation is now very low is that the empirical evidence on which it rests is mainly unconditional in nature.
For example, as I will illustrate later, a shock to desired portfolio holdings that causes the dollar to depreciate could, in principle, push up inflation for a sustained period, even if it had little influence on longer-term inflation expectations.
Because such risks to the inflation outlook are clearly a concern of monetary policy, a strong rationale exists for attempting to identify the transmission channels through which specific shocks affect inflation, real activity, and the exchange rate.
To identify those channels, we must keep in mind that the transmission from exchange rates to consumer prices depends importantly on the economic channels that influence pass-through from exchange rates to import prices.
Although the price measures upon which monetary policy makers focus the most attention are broad measures of consumer prices, most of the vast literature examining the effects of exchange rates on prices focuses on import prices at either an aggregate, sectoral, or industry level.4
Turning first to studies using broad indexes of import prices, considerable evidence suggests that pass-through to U.S.
For example, one study by Marazzi and Sheets (2007) found that the average cumulative response of the U.S.
import price index to an exchange rate change declined from around 0.5 in the 1970s and 1980s to around 0.2 in the past decade.5 The decline in responsiveness is especially apparent in finished goods, including consumer goods, capital goods excluding computers and semi-conductors, and automotive products (Gust, Leduc, and Vigfusson, 2006).
Evidence also suggests that pass-through to import prices in many major U.S.
trading partners is well below unity, even if typically somewhat higher than in the United States.
For example, Campa and Goldberg (2008) reported that the estimated pass-through to import prices for the United States ranked sixth-lowest among the twenty countries that they examined.
Pass-through to import prices also appears to have declined significantly in many major foreign countries (Ihrig, Marazzi, and Rothenberg, 2006; Otani, Shiratsuka, and Shirota, 2006).
The evidence from aggregate import price indexes is corroborated by industry studies that indicate that the response of prices to changes in foreign costs--including the exchange rate component--is quite low.
For example, Goldberg and Hellerstein (2007) found that the pass-through of changes in foreign costs to the retail price of imported beer was only 7 percent, so that a 10 percent rise in dollar-denominated costs would push up the price of beer by only 0.7 percent.6
Even if import prices react strongly to exchange rates, a monetary policy stance that is sufficiently reactive to inflation can insulate consumer price inflation from the effects of a shock that causes the exchange rate to depreciate.
For example, although the United Kingdom experienced a very large increase in import prices of about 13 percent in the half-year following the ERM crisis--which was nearly as large as the depreciation of its multilateral nominal exchange rate-- consumer price inflation remained subdued.
First, evidence of low pass-through to import prices provides strong corroboration of the empirical evidence discussed earlier indicating low pass-through to consumer prices as well as of my interpretation of the role of a strong nominal anchor in achieving the latter result.
If commitment to a nominal anchor was weak, and, as a result the economy was buffeted by nominal shocks--due perhaps to shifts in the central bank's target for trend inflation--pass-through to import prices should be both rapid and complete, and hence easier to identify empirically than using broader price indexes.
But the fact that exchange rate pass-through to import prices is far below unity, and appears to have declined as countries have pursued more stable and predictable monetary policies, provides a strong rebuttal to the argument that exchange rate depreciation is necessarily attributable to an unstable monetary policy.
The second reason that evidence of low pass-through to import prices is important is that it provides useful clues about the economic channels through which exchange rate changes affect activity and prices.
Notably, the empirical evidence contrasts starkly with the implications of a large class of open economy models that either embed the assumption of purchasing power parity or at least imply that producers have a constant desired markup over marginal cost.
As I will discuss, the new models that researchers have developed in this effort have substantially different implications for the transmission of shocks to exchange rates, consumer prices, and real output than their predecessors, and, in particular, imply that exchange rate changes tend to have much smaller expenditure-switching effects on real activity.
But before proceeding to that discussion, it is worth highlighting several prominent theoretical explanations that have been offered to account for low exchange rate pass-through.
The fact that exporters frequently appear to "price to market" provides one key explanation for incomplete pass-through to import prices (originally proposed by Krugman, 1987; and Dornbusch, 1987).7 In monopolistically competitive markets, optimizing firms vary their desired markup over marginal cost across different markets depending on the elasticity of demand that they face in each market.
These demand elasticities depend on the firm's market share, which in turn is affected by exchange rates.
For example, the new version of the SIGMA model--a dynamic stochastic general equilibrium (DSGE) model used at the Federal Reserve Board for policy simulations--adopts a framework in which the desired markup of producers varies directly with market share; because high-cost producers have a low market share, they desire to set a relatively low markup.
This specification implies that a firm exporting to the United States whose currency appreciated against the dollar would want to lower its markup to mitigate its loss in market share and is thus consistent with less-than-complete pass-through of exchange rate changes to import prices.8
Second, the combination of local currency pricing--meaning that an exporting firm sets the price of its good in the currency of the country to which it exports--together with nominal price rigidities implies that exchange rate fluctuations will have less impact on import prices, at least in the short run (Devereux and Engel, 2002; Bacchetta and van Wincoop, 2005; Campa and Goldberg, 2005; Gopinath, Itskhoki, and Rigobon, 2007; Gopinath and Rigobon, forthcoming).
Pricing in local currency seems to be even more prevalent for exports to the United States, which has such a large market.
This may account for why correlations between exchange rates and import prices appear to be lower for the United States than for most other countries.
Third, several studies have pointed out that distribution costs make up an important component of the retail price of imported goods (Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo, 2003; Campa and Goldberg, 2005; Berger and others, 2007).
Because distribution costs are probably fairly insensitive to shocks driving the exchange rate or foreign costs, they help insulate the retail price of imported goods from the effects of exchange rate fluctuations.
As I have discussed, an important limitation of the empirical evidence that indicates there is only a small increase, on average, in consumer price inflation when the exchange rate depreciates is that it is unconditional in nature: It does not tell how the relationship may vary depending on which shocks hit the economy.
One reason that structural models are useful is that they allow us to assess the relationship between exchange rate depreciation and consumer price inflation for a wide array of specific shocks, some of which may be regarded as potential risks to the outlook for inflation and real activity.
Structural models--especially modern DSGE models--are also helpful from a heuristic standpoint insofar as they highlight the economic channels through which shocks affect the economy, which is important in assessing the transmission from exchange rates to inflation and real activity.
The implications of a structural model for exchange rate pass-through clearly are sensitive to underlying features of the modeling environment.
In formulating the SIGMA model, it was regarded as crucial that the model account for the empirical regularity of low pass-through of exchange rate changes to import prices.
As I will illustrate, modeling assumptions that affect pass-through to import prices can have a major influence on the implied link between consumer price inflation and the exchange rate for any given shock.
Most open-economy DSGE models in the literature--including the first generation of the Federal Reserve Board's SIGMA model described in Erceg, Guerrieri, and Gust (2006)--have embedded Dixit-Stiglitz preferences, implying that the desired markup of price over marginal cost is a constant.
In such a framework, there is complete pass-through of exchange rate changes to import prices, at least after short-lived nominal price rigidities wear off.
Because import prices respond one-to-one to the exchange rate after a few quarters, shocks that cause the exchange rate to depreciate can put substantial upward pressure on consumer prices through the imported price component as well as through stimulating real activity by encouraging higher real net exports.
As noted previously, this feature tends to markedly damp pass-through from exchange rates to consumer prices in line with the empirical evidence I have discussed--both directly, because import prices respond by less to the exchange rate, and indirectly, because exchange rate changes tend to have smaller effects on domestic production.
In the terms of the literature, this specification forces a substantial "disconnect" between changes in exchange rates, inflation, and real activity.10
Specifically, this risk premium shock to the dollar raises the expected return that investors demand on assets denominated in dollars relative to assets denominated in foreign currencies.
The solid line denotes our preferred specification, which entails low pass-through to import prices both at home and abroad, while the dotted line shows the specification with constant desired markups, which implies complete pass-through to both U.S.
Under either specification of pass-through, it is assumed that monetary policy follows a standard Taylor rule.
It is worth noting that the Taylor rule reacts only to the four-quarter change in core consumer price inflation and the output gap (actual minus potential gross domestic product); monetary policy does not respond directly to the exchange rate.
As illustrated by Figure 1, the risk premium shock has broadly similar effects on the United States under either specification of pass-through.
In particular, the shock raises real net exports, because the induced depreciation of the dollar raises the relative price of imported goods and reduces the price of U.S.
This strengthening of real net exports, in turn, boosts U.S.
Moreover, consumer price inflation rises due both to higher import prices and because the stimulus to activity raises the marginal costs of domestic producers.
However, there are several important differences between the results under each specification.
Second, because the relative price of imports rises by less and the price of U.S.
exports in foreign markets also falls by less under the low pass-through specification, there are somewhat smaller effects on net exports and, hence, on real output.
Third, there is a smaller degree of "indirect" pressure on domestic inflation because of the smaller output response.11
First, they suggest that under an empirically reasonable specification that seems consistent with the low pass-through to import prices seen in U.S.
data, the effects of even a relatively large and sharp 10 percent decline in the dollar on output and inflation are fairly modest.
In particular, the output gap peaks at less than 1/2 percentage point above baseline, and the inflation rate peaks at only about 1/4 percentage point above baseline.
Thus, there seems to be a substantial disconnect between the exchange rate depreciation and nominal demand.
Under the specification implying full pass-through, the comparatively large jump in import prices and strong stimulus to activity results in a sizeable surge in inflation, even though long-term inflation expectations remain anchored and agents are assumed to be fully cognizant of the monetary rule.
Now let me summarize the lessons from the empirical evidence on exchange rate pass-through.
Sizeable depreciations of the nominal exchange rate exert fairly small effects on consumer prices across a wide set of industrial countries, and these effects have declined over the past two decades.
Exchange rate depreciations are thus likely to have less adverse effects on inflation than they have had in the past.
This evidence suggests that there may be a weaker relationship between exchange rate fluctuations and nominal demand than prevailed in the past, which may make it easier for monetary policy to stabilize inflation and real activity.
Nevertheless, exchange rate fluctuations can still have an effect on inflation and economic activity; hence, monetary policy must continue to take these fluctuations into account to ensure that inflation expectations remain well anchored and that fluctuations in economic activity are minimized.

"Trade Costs, Pricing-to-Market, and International Relative Prices," unpublished paper, University of California at Los Angeles.
"A Theory of the Currency Denomination of International Trade," Journal of International Economics, vol.
"Exchange Rate Pass-Through and the Inflation Environment in Industrialized Countries: An Empirical Investigation," Bank of Canada Working Paper No.
"The Exchange Rate in a Model of Pricing-to-Market," European Economic Review, vol.
40 (April, Papers and Proceedings of the Tenth Annual Congress of the European Economic Association), pp.
"Distribution Costs and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics During Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"Modeling Exchange Rate Passthrough after Large Devaluations," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"Exchange Rate Pass-through into Import Prices," Review of Economics and Statistics, vol.
"A Macroeconomic Model of International Price Discrimination," Journal of International Economics, vol.
"The Monetary Transmission Mechanism in the United Kingdom: Pass-Through and Policy Rules," Central Bank of Chile Working Paper No.
"Exchange Rate Pass-Through, Exchange Rate Volatility, and Exchange Rate Disconnect," Journal of Monetary Economics, vol.
"SIGMA: A New Open Economy Model for Policy Analysis," International Journal of Central Banking, vol.
"A Monetary Approach to the Exchange Rate: Doctrinal Aspects and Empirical Evidence," The Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 78 (June, Proceedings of a Conference on Flexible Exchange Rates and Stabilization Policy), pp.
"Exchange Rate Pass-Through When Market Share Matters," American Economic Review, vol.
"The Effect of Exchange Rates on Prices, Wages, and Profits: A Case Study of the United Kingdom in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Papers 772.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, October.
"Monetary Policy and Exchange Rate Pass-Through," International Journal of Finance and Economics, vol.
"Goods Prices and Exchange Rates: What Have We Learned?" Journal of Economic Literature, vol.
"A Framework for Identifying the Sources of Local-Currency Price Stability with an Empirical Application," unpublished paper.
"The Pass-Through From Depreciation to Inflation: A Panel Study," Banco Central do Brasil Working Paper Series No.
"Trade Integration, Competition, and the Decline in Exchange-Rate Pass-Through," International Finance Discussion Papers 864.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
"A Note on Transfer Prices and Exchange Rate Pass-Through," Journal of Economics and Finance, vol.
"Exchange Rate Pass-Through in the 1980s: The Case of U.S.
"Exchange Rate Pass-through in the G-7 Countries," International Finance Discussion Papers 851.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, January.
"Some Simple Tests of the Globalization and Inflation Hypothesis," International Finance Discussion Papers 891.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, April.
"Adjustment Costs and Pricing-to-Market Theory and Evidence," Journal of International Economics, vol.
"Pricing to Market When the Exchange Rate Changes," in Sven W.
"The Impact of Exchange Rate Movements on Consumer Prices", Bank of Canada Review (Winter), pp.
Import Prices: The Potential Role of Global Factors," Journal of International Money and Finance, vol.
"Pricing to Market in Japanese Manufacturing," NBER Working Paper No.
"Pass-Through of Exchange Rates and Import Prices to Domestic Inflation in Some Industrialised Economies," BIS Working Paper No.
"Inflation Dynamics," speech delivered at Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 23; published in (2008) International Finance, vol.
"Revisiting the Decline in the Exchange Rate Pass-Through: Further Evidence from Japan's Import Prices," Bank of Japan, Monetary and Economic Studies, vol.
"Time-Varying Exchange Rate Pass-Through: Experiences of Some Industrial Countries," BIS Working Paper No.
"Low Inflation, Pass-Through, and the Pricing Power of Firms," European Economic Review, vol.
"Exchange Rate Pass-through to Export Prices: Assessing Some Cross-Country Evidence," Review of International Economics.
My remarks reflect only my own views and are not intended to reflect those of the Federal Open Market Committee or of anyone else associated with the Federal Reserve System.Return to text
As argued in my book with Chairman Bernanke, Thomas Laubach, and Adam Posen (Bernanke and others, 1999), both Sweden and the United Kingdom’s adoption of an inflation targeting regime helped forestall a potentially larger rise in inflation.Return to text
Other research corroborates that pass-through from exchange rate changes to consumer prices has been extremely low over the past two decades for a large group of countries that have pursued stable monetary policies, including Ihrig, Marazzi, and Rothenberg (2006), Bailliu and Fujii (2004), and Sekine (2006).
In closely related work, Ihrig and others (2007) found a small role for import prices in influencing overall consumer price inflation.
A paper by Vigfusson, Sheets, and Gagnon (forthcoming) is an exception, because it focuses on exchange rate pass-through to export prices.
Other important early papers on pricing to market includes Froot and Klemperer (1989), Hooper and Mann (1989), Marston (1991), and Kasa (1992).
Moreover, Corsetti and Dedola (2005) argue that distribution costs may affect the elasticity of demand faced by exporting firms and hence affect import prices “at the dock” as well as at the retail level.Return to text
Refer to Betts and Devereaux (1996) and Devereaux and Engel (2002) for an examination of how pricing-to-market behavior tends to insulate nominal demand from the effects of exchange rate fluctuations.Return to text
It is useful to note that the responses of both inflation and the output gap under either pass-through specification would be much smaller under an “optimal” monetary policy rule derived by minimizing a loss function whose arguments depend on the variability of inflation and the output gap subject to the model’s behavioral equations.


At the Independent Community Bankers of America Annual Convention, Orlando, Florida
 This development has triggered a substantial and broad-based reassessment of risk in financial markets, and it has exacerbated the contraction in the housing sector.
Although I am aware, as you are, that community banks originated few subprime mortgages, community bankers are keenly interested in these issues; foreclosures not only create personal and financial distress for individual homeowners but also can significantly hurt neighborhoods where foreclosures cluster.
 Community bankers are well positioned to contribute to these efforts, given the strong relationships you have built with your customers and your communities.
 The worst payment problems have been among subprime adjustable-rate mortgages (subprime ARMs); more than one-fifth of the 3.6 million loans outstanding were seriously delinquent at the end of 2007.1  Delinquency rates have also risen for other types of mortgages, reaching 8 percent for subprime fixed-rate loans and 6 percent on adjustable-rate loans securitized in alt-A pools.
 Other data show that more than 40 percent of the subprime loans in the 2006 vintage had combined loan-to-value ratios in excess of 90 percent, a considerably higher share than earlier in the decade.3  Often, in recent mortgage vintages, small down payments were combined with other risk factors, such as a lack of documentation of sufficient income to make the required loan payments.
This weak underwriting might not have produced widespread payment problems had house prices continued to rise at the rapid pace seen earlier in the decade.
Delinquencies and foreclosures likely will continue to rise for a while longer, for several reasons.
 Second, many subprime borrowers are facing imminent resets of the interest rates on their mortgages.
 We estimate that the interest rate on a typical subprime ARM scheduled to reset in the current quarter will increase from just above 8 percent to about 9-1/4 percent, raising the monthly payment by more than 10 percent, to $1,500 on average.
 Declines in short-term interest rates and initiatives involving rate freezes will reduce the impact somewhat, but interest rate resets will nevertheless impose stress on many households.
 Borrowers are hampered not only by their lack of equity but also by the tighter credit conditions in mortgage markets.
 New securitizations of nonprime mortgages have virtually halted, and commercial banks have tightened their standards, especially for riskier mortgages.
 At the level of the individual community, increases in foreclosed-upon and vacant properties tend to reduce house prices in the local area, affecting other homeowners and municipal tax bases.

 The FHASecure plan, which the Federal Housing Administration (FHA) announced late last summer, offers qualified borrowers who are delinquent because of an interest rate reset the opportunity to refinance into an FHA-insured mortgage.
 Indeed, the Federal Reserve and other regulators have issued guidance urging lenders and servicers to pursue such arrangements as an alternative to foreclosure when feasible and prudent.5  For the lender or servicer, working out a loan makes economic sense if the net present value (NPV) of the payments under a loss-mitigation strategy exceeds the NPV of payments that would be received in foreclosure.6  Loss mitigation is made more attractive by the fact that foreclosure costs are often substantial.
With the time period between the last mortgage payment and REO liquidation lengthening in recent months, this loss rate will likely grow even larger.
 The low prices offered for subprime-related securities in secondary markets support the impression that the potential for recovery through foreclosure is limited.

Unfortunately, even though workouts may often be the best economic alternative, mortgage securitization and the constraints faced by servicers may make such workouts less likely.
We now have more information about the recent pace of loss-mitigation activity than we did just a few months ago, thanks to surveys of servicers by the Mortgage Bankers Association, the Conference of State Bank Supervisors, the Hope Now Alliance, and others.

 In such cases, the monthly payment is reduced through a lower interest rate, an extension of the maturity of the loan, or a write-down of the principal balance.
 The proposal by the Hope Now Alliance to freeze interest rates at the introductory rate for five years is an example of a modification, in this case applied to a class of eligible borrowers.
To date, permanent modifications that have occurred have typically involved a reduction in the interest rate, while reductions of principal balance have been quite rare.
 The preference by servicers for interest rate reductions could reflect familiarity with that technique, based on past episodes when most borrowers' problems could be solved that way.
 But the current housing difficulties differ from those in the past, largely because of the pervasiveness of negative equity positions.

 In an environment of falling house prices, however, whether a reduction in the interest rate is preferable to a principal writedown is not immediately clear.
 The fact that most mortgages terminate before maturity either by prepayment or default may favor an interest rate reduction.
 However, as I have noted, when the mortgage is "under water," a reduction in principal may increase the expected payoff by reducing the risk of default and foreclosure.
 A writedown that is sufficient to make borrowers eligible for a new loan would remove the downside risk to investors of additional writedowns or a re-default.
 Servicers could also benefit from greater use of short payoffs, as this approach would simplify the calculation of expected losses and eliminate the future costs and risks of retaining the troubled mortgage in the pool.
A potentially important step to facilitate greater use of short payoffs is the modernization of the FHA, which I have supported.
 A concern about such an approach is that servicers might refinance only their riskiest borrowers into the FHA program.
 A combination of careful underwriting, the use of risk premiums, and other measures (for example, a provision that would allow the FHA to return a mortgage that quickly re-defaults to the servicer) could help mitigate that risk.
 For example, investors in different tranches of mortgage-backed securities may not benefit equally, securitized trusts may not be permitted to acquire new equity warrants, and principal writedowns may require a different accounting treatment than interest rate reductions.
 But just as market participants, with the help of regulators, obtained greater clarity on the use of interest rate freezes through guidelines issued by the American Securitization Forum, industry and regulator efforts could also help clarify how this alternative type of workout might be effectively applied.
I would like to comment briefly on Federal Reserve System efforts to reduce preventable foreclosures and their costs on borrowers and communities.
 The Federal Reserve can help by leveraging three important strengths:  our analytical and data resources; our national presence; and our history of working closely with lenders, community groups, and other local stakeholders.
 A major thrust of our efforts is sharing relevant and timely data analysis of mortgage delinquencies with community groups and policymakers to efficiently target resources to areas most in need.
 For example, we recently assisted NeighborWorks America in identifying regions and neighborhoods that are at risk of higher rates of foreclosure and could benefit from increased mortgage counseling capacity.

The Federal Reserve System also is supporting efforts to reach troubled borrowers and to raise awareness in communities about ways to prevent foreclosures.
 Since July, the community affairs groups across the Federal Reserve System have sponsored or cosponsored more than fifty events related to foreclosures, reaching more than 4,000 attendees including lenders, counselors, community development specialists, and policymakers.
We are also concerned about the challenges of neighborhoods that have seen large increases in foreclosures and vacant properties and have begun to work with policymakers, lenders (including community banks) and community groups to address these problems.
Reducing the rate of preventable foreclosures would promote economic stability for households, neighborhoods, and the nation as a whole.
 The fact that many troubled borrowers have little or no equity suggests that greater use of principal writedowns or short payoffs, perhaps with shared appreciation features, would be in the best interest of both borrowers and lenders.
 This approach would be facilitated by allowing the FHA the flexibility to offer refinancing products to more borrowers.
Ultimately, though, real relief for the mortgage market requires stabilization, and then recovery, in the nation's housing sector.
 I am sure that the FHA and the Department of Housing and Urban Development, given the appropriate powers by the Congress, will make every effort to expand their operations and to help improve the functioning of the market for home-purchase mortgages.
 For community bankers, FHA modernization and expansion would provide an important opportunity--of which I urge you to take advantage--to better serve your customers and community.

 I urge the Congress and the GSEs to take the steps necessary to allow more potential homebuyers access to mortgage credit at reasonable terms.
 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2007), "Working with Mortgage Borrowers," Division of Banking Supervision and Regulation, Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 07-6 (April 17); and "Statement on Loss Mitigation Strategies for Servicers of Residential Mortgages," Supervision and Regulation Letter SR 07-16 (September 5).
 By comparing these NPVs, servicers can fulfill their obligation to investors under many pooling and servicing agreements, which is to maximize the return from all loans in the trust, including those that are in default or are reasonably likely to default.

At the National Association for Business Economics Washington Policy Conference, Washington, D.C.
 The National Association for Business Economics policy conferences always focus on the critical issues facing the economy, and this conference follows in that tradition.
 In my remarks today I will review the current economic situation and the outlook for real activity and inflation.
 I will offer some specific observations about the recent deterioration in economic activity, highlight several risks facing the economy, and review recent inflation dynamics.
 I should note that the views I will express here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).1
 The housing sector continues to weaken, production and spending in other parts of the economy have decelerated, the labor market has softened noticeably, and the turmoil in financial markets has led to a reduced availability and a higher cost of credit to many households and businesses.
 Indeed, real gross domestic product (GDP) rose at an annual rate of only 0.6 percent in the fourth quarter, and the available data suggest that the economy has relatively little momentum going into the first quarter.
 Moreover, upward pressures on inflation have emerged, emanating in part from the rapid increases in prices of crude oil and some other commodities.
 As the financial landscape became more uncertain, a broader tightening of credit conditions took hold, with investors becoming less willing to bear risk, more concerned about the valuations of a wide range of complex financial instruments, and more concerned about counterparty credit risk.
 Reflecting these concerns, the functioning of the short-term credit markets deteriorated dramatically, corporate bond spreads rose, and the market value of leveraged loans and other securities fell.
 In addition, banks were forced to bring onto their balance sheets a significant volume of loans and other securities, and in the second half of 2007, banks took large write-downs on mortgage-related and other assets.
 In recent months, short-term credit markets have functioned better than in the summer but have remained strained, risk spreads on corporate bonds have risen markedly further on concerns about the near-term outlook for corporate credit quality, and equity prices have weakened considerably.
 Moreover, substantial uncertainty remains about the magnitude and distribution of credit losses going forward and the extent to which those losses will lead to tighter credit conditions.

To help place these developments into perspective, I would note that the turmoil in financial markets emerged at a time when the economy was otherwise in pretty good shape.
 Real GDP growth held up reasonably well through the summer--despite the ongoing declines in home building--and balance sheets of nonfinancial corporations remained strong.
 In addition, the financial system entered last summer with some strengths.
 Most large financial institutions had strong balance sheets and solid earnings, as delinquencies and charge-off rates on most types of loans were at low levels.
 At the same time, the financial market infrastructure for clearing and settlement was robust and, subsequently, performed well.
 Moreover, as I have discussed in earlier speeches, I believe that monetary policy has helped to effectively anchor long-run inflation expectations, which in turn helped to restrain core consumer price inflation in spite of energy and other supply shocks.
In an environment of well-anchored inflation expectations, the FOMC had the scope to respond aggressively to the strains in financial markets that emerged late last summer and to the worsening economic outlook.
 Indeed, since September, the FOMC has cut the federal funds rate five times, for a total of 225 basis points.
 In addition, the Federal Reserve has taken a number of other steps to ease strains in short-term funding markets.
 These policy actions, along with the recently enacted fiscal stimulus package, should support economic activity and should improve the odds of avoiding more adverse outcomes.
The most recent economic projections made by Federal Reserve Board members and Reserve Bank presidents--released a couple of weeks ago but submitted around the time of the late January FOMC meeting--show sluggish economic growth this year but not a downturn in activity.

Turning to some specifics, the ongoing correction in the housing market has been a substantial drag on real GDP growth over the past two years, with declines in real residential investment subtracting about 1 percentage point from the growth of real GDP last year.
 This weakness intensified in the second half of 2007 with the dramatic decrease in the availability of mortgage credit for nonprime borrowers and with a widening of spreads on jumbo loans.
 In addition, the Federal Reserve's latest Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey on Bank Lending Practices indicates that a large fraction of reporting banks have tightened lending standards on all types of residential mortgages.
 As of January, the months' supply of new homes for sale--that is, the ratio of unsold inventory to sales--was more than twice its average level from 1997 through the summer of 2005.
 Given that sizable backlog and the subdued level of demand, cutbacks in housing construction seem likely to continue being a drag on economic activity for some time to come.
 But spending growth slowed noticeably toward the end of the year, and the most recent readings on real consumer purchases point to a soft first quarter.
 Very soft house prices and a weak stock market have reduced household wealth.
 Slowing labor demand and the steep increases in the price of imported oil have damped real income gains.
 And banks report that they have tightened the terms and standards for consumer loans.
 Together, these factors are likely to restrain spending growth in the period ahead.
 Moreover, spreads on corporate bonds across a wide range of credit qualities have been moving up, especially for riskier firms, and an increasing number of banks report that they are tightening lending standards for business loans.
 However, prospects for the coming year are less buoyant given the tightening credit conditions as well as the slowdown in economic activity more broadly.
Turning now to international trade, export growth has been a bright spot for the U.S.
economy, boosted by past declines in the exchange value of the dollar and solid economic growth abroad.
exports has offset some of the negative effects on producers here in the United States from the deterioration in domestic spending.
 Although foreign economies also have been affected by financial turmoil, and growth among our trading partners is showing some signs of slowing, expanding exports should continue to help support economic activity in the United States.
In the labor market, private payrolls decelerated over the course of 2007 and were reported to have been unchanged in January.
 The unemployment rate, after remaining near 4-1/2 percent in the first half of last year, has moved up about 1/2 percentage point to nearly 5 percent, its highest level since late 2005.
 And the labor market appears to have softened further in February.
 Initial claims for unemployment insurance, which can be a timely indicator of labor market activity, moved up appreciably in February.
 Moreover, recent surveys of hiring plans have become less favorable, and households' assessments of current job availability and of expected labor market conditions have deteriorated.
 With the pace of economic activity expected to be sluggish in the near term, I anticipate some further rise in joblessness this year.
For the reasons cited, I continue to expect a period of economic weakness in the near term that should be offset to a degree in future quarters by the monetary easing already in place and the fiscal stimulus package.
 Nonetheless, the economy faces significant downside risks that could contribute to a worse outcome.
 Key among those risks is a worse-than-expected outcome in the housing market as a result of more adverse housing-price dynamics.2  IIn particular, declines in housing prices, rather than stimulating demand, could further depress home purchases, at least for a time.

 This notion can be made more precise by organizing ideas around the standard neoclassical model of capital investment.
 In this framework, the so-called user cost of capital is an important determinant of the demand for any investment good--including housing.
 The user cost will increase when, among other things, the purchase price of housing rises relative to the prices of other goods and services or mortgage interest rates move up.
In addition to these factors, Case and Shiller (2003) have emphasized that changes in expected house prices can play an important role in the demand for housing through the user-cost channel.
 This factor presumably contributed to the robust demand for housing during the period when house prices were rising rapidly and were expected to continue doing so.
 Indeed, a drop of 1 percentage point in the expected rate of change in real house prices, all else being equal, is equivalent in the user-cost framework to an increase of 100 basis points in the after-tax mortgage interest rate.
 Consequently, if house prices fall more than expected, and that condition leads to more adverse expectations for future changes in house prices, then housing demand could fall as a result.
A second risk to the economy is that larger-than-expected declines in house prices would be expected to lead to a larger-than-expected drag on consumer spending through the usual wealth-effect channel, as a lower path of household net worth restrains consumption.
 Because prospective borrowers typically have more information about their ability to repay the loan than do lenders, homeownership can play a role in reducing the problems of asymmetric information in consumer credit markets by providing collateral that reduces those information problems.
 Good collateral increases the borrower's incentive to repay the loan and significantly reduces potential losses to the lender upon borrower default.

The same idea is expressed another way in a paper by Ben Bernanke and Mark Gertler (1995), who suggested that a decline in house prices can increase the wedge between the default-free interest rate and the effective interest rate facing the homeowner.
 That is, in the eyes of the lenders, declining house prices diminish the quality of the borrowers' collateral, which effectively reduces the availability of credit to households that can be used to finance consumer purchases.
Another significant risk to the outlook is that lending standards could tighten more than expected not only for mortgages but for other types of credit as well.
 As I have noted, the January 2008 Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey highlighted the fact that many banks are tightening lending standards and terms in a number of credit markets.
 At the same time, capital at some banks has come under pressure, as institutions have been forced to bring some loans and other securities back onto their own balance sheets.
 Because this process is still unfolding, it poses a risk that credit standards for households and businesses could tighten more than expected and significantly crimp spending.
Finally, I would note the possibility of a feedback loop between financial market disruptions and deterioration in the real economy that I have emphasized in previous speeches (Mishkin, 2008a, 2008b).
 Because economic downturns typically result in even greater uncertainty about asset values, such episodes may trigger an adverse feedback loop whereby financial disruptions cause investment and consumer spending to decline, which, in turn, causes economic activity to contract.
 This development then causes economic activity to contract further in a perverse cycle.
 Recently, headline inflation has been pushed higher by sizable increases in food and energy prices; crude oil prices have surged, and food prices have risen significantly, reflecting strong global demand in general as well as hefty demand in particular for corn for use in ethanol production.
Even excluding food and energy, recent readings on inflation also have been elevated, although over the past year core PCE prices decelerated a touch from 2.4 percent to 2.2 percent.
 The recent observations on core inflation suggest that higher energy costs and the lower exchange value of the dollar may have been sources of upward pressure on core inflation.
 However, the recent bump up in inflation also likely reflected a reversal of unusually low readings earlier last year for apparel, prescription drugs, and so-called nonmarket items in the index, and the contribution of these items to core inflation is likely to wane.
In my view, long-run inflation dynamics are influenced importantly both by prospects for the future balance of aggregate supply and demand, as well as by longer-run inflation expectations (Mishkin, 2007a).
 By a range of measures, longer-run inflation expectations appear to have remained reasonably well contained even as recent readings on headline inflation have been elevated.
 The median expectation of inflation five to ten years ahead in the Reuters/University of Michigan survey stands in the middle of the range that has been evident over the past couple of years, although the expectation for year-ahead inflation from this same survey has moved up recently, presumably in response to the higher rates of actual inflation.
 In addition, although the measure of long-run expectations for consumer price index (CPI) inflation from the Survey of Professional Forecasters ticked up in February, this measure remained at essentially the same value that has prevailed since 1998.
As for inflation compensation derived from spreads between yields on nominal and inflation-indexed Treasury securities (known as Treasury Inflation-Protected Securities, or TIPS), the implied rate of inflation compensation from five years ahead to ten years ahead (the so-called five-to-ten-year-forward rate) has risen somewhat since the beginning of the year.
 Does this rise in forward inflation compensation indicate that long-run inflation expectations have risen by a similar amount?  My best guess is that much of the rise in inflation compensation reflects other factors.
To begin, recall that inflation compensation measured by using TIPS yields is not the same thing as inflation expectations.
 Rather, movements in inflation compensation reflect not only changes in inflation expectations, but also changes in an inflation risk premium and in the relative liquidity of TIPS and similar maturity nominal Treasuries.3  To see that these components are distinct, recall that during the period of heightened concerns about deflation in 2003 and 2004, forward inflation compensation rose substantially to an unusually high level amid concerns about an unwelcome fall in inflation; that earlier episode, in particular, underscores the fact that we must be careful in using the forward rates of inflation compensation as a gauge of long-run inflation expectations.
 To see this distinction another way, consider a scenario in which inflation uncertainty increased but inflation expectations did not.
 In that case, the midpoint of inflation expectations would remain the same, but the range around the midpoint would increase.
Turning specifically to the recent experience, consider the sequence of one-year-forward rates of inflation compensation--that is, decompose ten-year inflation compensation into a sequence of one-year-forward rates.
 The one-year-forward rate ending about five years from now has moved up, but the forward rate ending in ten years has climbed more than twice as much.
 This pattern suggests an important role for factors other than rising long-run inflation expectations in explaining recent movements in inflation compensation as one might suppose that any tendency toward higher inflation would be expected to show through within five years.
 And survey measures of long-run inflation expectations--including that from the Survey of Professional Forecasters--have moved relatively little.
 Altogether, the evidence points toward the inflation risk premium as the likely cause of much of the rise in five-to-ten-year-ahead inflation compensation.
 Although a distinctly different concept from inflation expectations, policymakers need to be concerned about any widening of inflation uncertainty.
 Indeed, an increase in inflation uncertainty would likely complicate decision making by consumers and businesses concerning plans for spending, savings, and investment.
What does this mean for the inflation outlook?  I expect inflation pressures to wane over the next few years, as product and labor markets soften and the rise in food and energy prices abates.
 In addition, I continue to believe that long-run inflation expectations remain consistent with increases in PCE prices in the neighborhood of 2 percent per year.4  Accordingly, I anticipate that over time core PCE inflation will move back to around 2 percent.
 The risks around this outlook appear to me to be balanced, although the uncertainty surrounding the outlook may have widened recently, consistent with the apparent rise in the inflation risk premium.
 The risks associated with higher oil and commodity prices are a concern as is the possibility that past cost shocks may have a more pronounced effect on core inflation than has been apparent to date.
 Working in the opposite direction, with the risks to the real economy and resource utilization skewed to the downside, there are accompanying risks that inflation may be subject to some additional downward pressure.
 Regardless of how these risks play out, a commitment to a strong nominal anchor will be crucial to the success of monetary policy.
 Any tendency for longer-run inflation expectations to become unanchored would pose a significant problem for monetary policy makers, and the FOMC will be closely monitoring inflation and inflation expectations in coming months.

To summarize, with the economic outlook having deteriorated significantly and financial markets under considerable stress, the FOMC will face significant challenges.
 As noted in the statement following the January meeting, the FOMC "will continue to assess the effects of financial and other developments on economic prospects and will act in a timely manner as needed" to address risks facing the economy (FOMC, 2008).
 The FOMC's critical challenge will be to calibrate monetary policy in a way that best achieves its dual objectives of maximum employment and price stability.

 "Inside the Black Box:  The Credit Channel of Monetary Policy Transmission," Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol.
 "Is There a Bubble in the Housing Market?"  Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, vol.
 "FOMC Statement and Board Approval of Discount Rate Requests of the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Atlanta, Chicago, St.
 "The TIPS Yield Curve and Inflation Compensation," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2008-05.
 Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, February.
 "Inflation Dynamics," speech delivered at the Annual Macro Conference, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, San Francisco, March 23.
 "Housing and the Monetary Transmission Mechanism," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2007-40.
 Washington:  Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August.
 "Monetary Policy Flexibility, Risk Management, and Financial Disruptions," speech delivered at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, New York, January 11.
 "The Federal Reserve's Tools for Responding to Financial Disruptions," speech delivered at the Tuck Global Capital Markets Conference, Tuck School of Business, Dartmouth College, Hanover, N.H., February 15.
 They discuss the decomposition of inflation compensation into these distinct components and argue that far-forward rates of inflation compensation are too volatile to be pure measures of long-run inflation expectations.
 Note that expectations for CPI inflation must be adjusted to convert them from a CPI basis to a PCE basis.

At the Jump$tart Coalition for Personal Financial Literacy and Federal Reserve Board joint news conference, Washington, D.C.
We are here today to learn about a report on a topic of vital importance to our economic future: the financial literacy of America’s young people.
As a former educator and school board member, and as the parent of two young adults, I am personally convinced that improving education is vital to the future of our economy and that promoting financial literacy in particular must be a high priority.
In particular, through its biennial survey of high school seniors--the results of which you will hear about in a few minutes--Jump$tart has brought increased attention to the issue of financial literacy among youth in the United States.
The Federal Reserve is strongly committed to Jump$tart’s mission to better educate America’s youth about personal finance.
On the regional level, many Federal Reserve Bank staff members work closely with the state coalitions to help achieve this mission.
In fact, there is at least one specialist in economic education at each of the Reserve Banks and at most of the Branches.
The Federal Reserve also supports a variety of programs and initiatives to increase financial literacy.
The first is a student competition called The Fed Challenge, a program designed to teach students about monetary policy and the national economy.
Among other activities, students in this competition take the roles of Federal Reserve governors and regional Reserve Bank presidents in a mock meeting of the Federal Open Market Committee.
Participating Reserve Banks work in partnership with the Board to bring the winning teams to Washington, where the final rounds of competition will be held here in the Board Room.
I have had the opportunity on several occasions to serve as a judge in the national finals of The Fed Challenge, and I can attest that the economic knowledge displayed by the students in that competition is remarkable indeed.
The Board also recently collaborated with many of the Reserve Banks on a redesigned Federal Reserve financial education web portal that brings many of the System’s resources for financial education together in one location.
We will continue to work to expand the resources and programs devoted to this important public purpose.

At the European Central Bank and Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Joint Conference on Issues Related to Central Counterparty Clearing, Frankfurt, Germany
As many of you know, I became a member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System only a month ago.
I am delighted to be giving my first speech as a governor at a conference that has resulted from the kind of international cooperation that I see as essential in today's world.
The joint sponsorship of this conference by the European Central Bank (ECB) and the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago represents an extremely fruitful collaboration of researchers, market participants, and policymakers from both sides of the Atlantic.
Having been a research consultant at the Chicago Fed for many years and having visited the ECB numerous times since its founding less than eight years ago, I have many friends at both institutions and am pleased to see so many of those friends here today.
In addition, I am delighted that the topic of this cooperative venture and my maiden speech is central counterparty (CCP) clearing.
In recent years, public policymakers have demonstrated growing interest and concern about the effectiveness of CCP risk management.
In particular, in November 2004 the Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems (CPSS) of the Group of Ten central banks and the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) jointly issued comprehensive international standards for CCP risk management.1 I have often cited CCPs for exchange-traded derivatives as a prime example of how market forces can privately regulate financial risk very effectively.2 Indeed, it is hard to find fault with the track record of derivatives CCPs, many of which have managed counterparty risk so effectively that they have never suffered a counterparty default.
I see that good track record as a result of innovations that over time produced organizational arrangements that have provided market participants with the incentives and capabilities to ensure effective CCP risk management, thereby serving the public interest as well as the interests of market participants.
Significant changes to those arrangements could result in less-effective risk management.
Finally, more-intense government regulation of CCPs may prove counterproductive if it creates moral hazard or impedes the ability of CCPs to develop new approaches to risk management.
As cross-border activity becomes ever more important, regulatory differences across countries may become an increasingly serious impediment to innovation by CCPs.
I do this not for antiquarian interest but because this history illustrates how market forces led to the evolution of organizational and contractual features that have created strong incentives for effective private regulation that addressed both market participants' and public policymakers' concerns about risk control.
I will conclude with some views on how government regulation can provide an environment in which private regulation of CCP risk management continues to be effective.
My review of the historical development of central counterparties will focus on the CCP for grain futures traded on the Chicago Board of Trade (CBOT).
I make no claim that a CCP first arose in the United States.
Indeed, a number of coffee and grain exchanges in Europe had some form of CCP in the late nineteenth century, well before any U.S.
exchange.3 Rather, I simply am more familiar with developments in Chicago, in large measure because of the time that Jim Moser spent digging through the CBOT's archives while on the staff of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.4 Furthermore, the market forces that drove the evolution of risk controls at the CBOT likely produced a broadly similar evolution on other exchanges.
An important lesson from the CBOT's experience is that a CCP emerged gradually and slowly as a result of experience and experimentation.
The next step along the road to addressing private and public concerns about effective risk control was the CBOT's creation of a clearinghouse in 1883.
But if the losses exceeded the value of the margin, the deficiency would be charged against the clearinghouse's capital, including the capital owned by the non-defaulting members.
This organizational arrangement has been adopted by many other CCPs, both for exchange-traded derivatives and for cash securities transactions.
I characterize this structure as a partial integration of the members of the exchange into a single unit because each member is now at least in part financially responsible for the performance of the others' obligations arising from contracts traded on the exchange.6 The mutualization of risk creates incentives for all the exchange's members to support the imposition of risk controls that limit the extent to which the trading activities of any individual member expose all other members to losses from defaults.
Moreover, because the members own the clearinghouse, they have the capability to act on their incentives for effective CCP risk management.
I see this alignment of incentives for effective risk management with the ability to act on those incentives as the key to the strong historical track record of derivatives CCPs.
What is interesting and instructive about the history of these arrangements is that it illustrates how market forces can produce private regulations that address the concerns about safety, soundness, and broader financial stability.
During the twentieth century, various changes occurred in the historical organizational arrangements that I have characterized as a partial integration of the members of the exchange.
Both horizontally integrated CCPs and vertically integrated CCPs have often arranged for insurance policies that limit the potential losses to their clearing members from defaults.
Clearly some of these changes have important implications for competition among exchanges.
But they may also have implications for the effectiveness of risk management, which is the focus of my remarks today.
As I have discussed, historically the key to effective risk management has been that the members of the exchange have borne the risk of losses from defaults and have had the capacity to institute risk controls (principally membership standards and margin requirements) that have limited those risks.
The question then is whether any of these changes to the organization of CCPs has left those bearing the risks without the capacity to manage those risks.
First, a CCP's default rules need to be transparent: The party that bears the risk of default (who has "skin in the game") must be clear to all.
Second, a CCP's governance arrangements must provide those with "skin in the game" with substantial influence over the CCP's risk controls.
In the United States, the New York Stock Exchange established a clearinghouse in 1892 and transformed it into a true CCP in 1920.
But, outside the United States, few securities exchanges established CCPs until late in the twentieth century.
Today, a CCP is in place and functioning in nearly all major securities markets.
Increasingly often, CCPs for securities clear trades, including trades and repurchase agreements involving government bonds, in the over-the-counter securities markets.
Some of them have argued that bilateral credit risk management, which uses many of the same techniques that CCPs use (netting and margin requirements), is highly effective.
Another consideration for the most creditworthy dealers may be the potential effect of CCP clearing on mitigating the competitive advantage of their creditworthiness.7
In that regard, a recent report by leading participants in the OTC derivatives markets expressed concern about the feasibility of close-out procedures in the event of default of a large market participant in stressed market conditions.8 Further experimentation with close-out procedures may be necessary to address that concern.
Policymakers must be very careful to avoid any impression that government oversight comes with a promise of government financial support in the event of a risk-management failure; otherwise, private-market discipline, which has served private and public interests in the stability of CCP arrangements so well for so long, may well be eviscerated.
First, it should ensure that a CCP's risk-management policies and procedures, especially its policies for handling defaults and allocating the burden of losses from defaults, are transparent to market participants.
That is the potential for conflicting regulation (and laws) to impede the evolution of CCP arrangements, especially the potential for economies of scale and scope to be achieved through consolidation.
I am always puzzled when I hear the United States held up as the model for the benefits of consolidation of the clearing and settlement infrastructure.
We have achieved significant consolidation within the securities markets and within the futures markets.
But I am struck by the lack of consolidation of securities and futures CCPs.
Even if a business case exists, however, I believe consolidation would be difficult to achieve due to the legal and regulatory distinctions in the United States between securities and futures.
Law and regulation seem also to be placing significant barriers in the way of consolidation of the securities and derivatives clearing and settlement infrastructure in Europe.
Policymakers in all countries need to examine whether legal and regulatory distinctions are impeding innovation and, if so, whether the distinctions are meaningful and essential for the achievement of public policy objectives.
I read with interest and appreciation European Union Commissioner McCreevy's recent speech at the London School of Economics on the development of the European capital markets, in which he decried the signs of a new wave of protectionism in Europe.10 As he noted, "Protectionism is a proven route to economic stagnation and decline."11 This is an important message, indeed.
My reading of the history of CCP clearing is that it teaches us that private-market regulation can be effective for achieving the public policy goal of safety and soundness and broader financial stability.
Innovation should be fostered, and regulatory protectionism should be rejected.
 Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of the International Organization of Securities Commissions (2004), Recommendations for Central Counterparties (Basel: Bank for International Settlements, November).
Kroszner (2000), "Lessons from Financial Crises:  The Role of Clearinghouses," Journal of Financial Services Research, vol.
71-72 of Henry Crosby Emery (1896), Speculation on the Stock and Produce Exchanges of the United States (New York: Columbia University).
Moser (1998), "Contracting Innovations and the Evolution of Clearing and Settlement Methods of Futures Exchanges," Working Paper (Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago).
 For one account that argues that the introduction of CCP clearing in U.S.
futures markets was delayed by financially strong members who were resistant to giving up the advantage of their high credit quality and to implicitly subsidizing weaker, see Craig Pirrong (1997), "A Positive Theory of Financial Exchange Organization with Normative Implications for Financial Market Regulation," Working Paper (St.
 Counterpart Risk Management Policy Group II (2005), Toward Greater Financial Stability: A Private Sector Perspective (New York: CRMPG II, July).
 Charlie McCreevy (2006), The Development of the European Capital Market (London: London School of Economics, March 9).

At the Institute of International Finance Spring 2006 Membership Meeting, Zurich, Switzerland
I am pleased to participate in the panel discussion at this Institute of International Finance Spring 2006 Membership Meeting.
As I will make clear, I think meetings of this sort, by contributing to the dialogue between the leaders of financial institutions and policymakers, can play a critical role in increasing mutual understanding and improved decisionmaking by both groups.
The financial environment can best be described as "dynamic." Financial innovations have been coming at a rapid pace in recent years; new financial products have been introduced and are expanding rapidly, and new institutions have taken on prominent roles in key financial markets.
Financial technologies have improved as well and have the potential to contribute to the efficiency and resilience of financial markets.
However, with new products and institutions comes the potential for new risks to financial stability.
On the other hand, because of possible systemic concerns, some policymakers may want to regulate innovative instruments and institutions even as they are developing.
In my view, policymakers can best balance these goals by expending the effort needed to understand financial innovations as they emerge and by avoiding overregulation that may stifle valuable innovations.
A far-reaching set of innovations is the development and increasing popularity of products for the transfer of credit risk.
Prominent among such innovations are credit derivatives, asset-backed securities, and secondary-market trading of syndicated loans.
Another important development has been the rapid growth of the hedge fund industry and its expanded role in the financial system.
On the retail side, we have seen a proliferation of new lending products in the United States, including home-equity lines of credit, interest-only and even negative-amortization mortgages, and subprime mortgages and consumer loans.
Today, I will discuss briefly the potential benefits and drawbacks associated with new products and institutions and spend most of my remarks on a middle way that regulators might pursue as these new products and institutions emerge.
Financial innovations hold the promise of improved efficiency and increased overall economic welfare.
For example, new products and markets can open the door to new investment opportunities for a variety of market participants.
And improved risk-measurement and risk-management technologies can contribute to an improved allocation of risk as risk is shifted to those more willing and able to bear it.
Financial innovations also have the potential to boost financial stability.
Risk-transfer mechanisms can not only better allocate risk but also reduce its concentration.
Improved efficiencies and increased competition may result in substantially lower trading costs and may consequently improve liquidity in many markets.
Better liquidity, which is instrumental to faster and more accurate price discovery and therefore to more-informative prices, can also be brought about by an increased presence of new institutions in new or existing markets.
The entry of those new institutions into new markets can, so long as the institutions prove resilient, increase the availability of funds to borrowers in times of stress and may thus reduce the likelihood of credit crunches.
Although financial innovations have the capacity to improve economic welfare overall, it is natural for policymakers to worry that innovations may have unexpected and undesirable side effects and may even represent new sources of systemic risk.
Market participants estimate how prices and investment flows are likely to behave for new instruments, but their understanding becomes more detailed and more accurate only as behavior under a variety of economic conditions is observed, and the development of that understanding obviously takes time.
Under turbulent conditions, or when new information causes market participants to question their own investment strategies, their behavior may change rapidly, leading to rapid price changes that may seem outsized relative to changes in economic fundamentals.
That was briefly the case recently in the market for synthetic collateralized debt obligations.
Market participants did not anticipate the sharp decline in implied default correlations that followed the downgrades of Ford and General Motors debt.
Prices moved quite a bit for a short time as portfolios were rebalanced, but spillovers to other markets were limited, and market volatility subsequently eased.
Problems with the infrastructure or operations that support an innovation--including the underlying legal documentation and accounting--are also likely to be revealed only over time, as exemplified by the technical difficulties with restructuring clauses in credit default swaps that became apparent a few years ago.
The result was a change in the value of existing contracts and a period of market adjustment as new restructuring clauses were developed and implemented.
Of course, we should not want to prevent rapid price changes or changes in investment flows, as such changes may be appropriate as new information about fundamentals emerges.
And the occurrence of glitches in new markets and institutions need not reflect policy failures or provide evidence that an innovation is undesirable.
But neither is it desirable that growing pains in one market or at a few institutions spill over so strongly that the financial system as a whole could be destabilized.
At one extreme, in theory we could take a completely hands-off approach, allowing new financial markets and instruments to develop without restrictions and indeed without any scrutiny, trusting private market participants to do everything necessary for stability and efficiency.
At the other extreme, policymakers theoretically might be quite heavy-handed, either imposing regulations on virtually every market and instrument to stop any innovations that, in their judgment, could cause harm or, conversely, actively fostering or subsidizing innovations seen as desirable.
Today I wish to argue for a middle ground in which markets are allowed to work and develop and in which policymakers work hard to understand new developments and to help market participants see the need for improvements where appropriate.
In my view, regulations should be imposed only when market participants do not have the incentive or the capability to effectively manage the risks created by financial innovation.
For example, explicit or implicit subsidies of some institutions could limit market discipline of their risk-taking, leading to a concentration of risk so large that even the most sophisticated institutions would find it next to impossible to manage the risk under stressful circumstances.
Or policymakers may be concerned that some potential parties to innovative contracts, especially in the retail arena, are insufficiently knowledgeable to understand or manage the associated risks.
Making a case for early regulatory intervention is particularly difficult when the private parties involved in an innovation are sophisticated because, in many cases, they will be the first to recognize possible problems and will have strong incentives to fix them and also to protect themselves against fraud or unfair dealing.
Those firms independently evaluated the risks they faced and took appropriate action to manage them effectively.
For example, in light of the effects of financial consolidation on the number of firms acting as dealers in the market for dollar interest rate options, the Federal Reserve became concerned about possible risks to the functioning of that market.
These concerns included questions about the adequacy of risk management at the remaining dealers and about the possible effects that problems at one of those dealers could have on its counterparties and market liquidity.
However, further investigation by Federal Reserve staff suggested that market participants were generally managing their market and counterparty risks effectively and that those hedging risk in the options market would not unduly suffer from a temporary disruption in liquidity.
Our wariness about concentration in this market has not disappeared as a result of our improved understanding, but it has diminished.
A second step for policymakers walking the middle path should be to ensure that market participants have the proper incentives and the information they need to protect themselves from any problems related to new products, markets, or institutions; by so doing, policymakers can perhaps mitigate those problems.
Policymakers should insist that regulated firms effectively manage the risks associated with new activities and markets, thereby fostering effective market discipline of risk-taking, including risk-taking by unregulated firms.
One of the lessons of the difficulties at Long-Term Capital Management (LTCM) was that the hedge fund had been able to achieve very high levels of leverage because some regulated counterparties had not appropriately managed their counterparty risk exposures.
Subsequently, both banks and supervisors had to reassess what such management entailed.
Clearly, supervisors should strongly encourage institutions to know their risk posture and to be able to control it and react appropriately as circumstances change.
Policymakers should insist on similarly high risk-management standards for regulated financial institutions that provide retail products.
As a case in point, bank supervisors in the United States recently issued guidance about the management of risks related to home-equity lines of credit.
This guidance did not involve new regulation of these instruments but rather reminded institutions offering such products that they have an obligation to manage the resulting risks appropriately.
A third feature of the moderate approach I am trying to chart is an active dialogue between policymakers and market participants.
Ideally such steps would be taken by market participants of their own volition, but sometimes informal interventions by policymakers can help foster cooperative efforts by market participants.
For example, partly in reaction to the report of the second Counterparty Risk Management Policy Group, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York recently hosted a meeting with representatives of major participants in the credit default swap market, as well as with their domestic and international supervisors, to discuss a range of issues, including market practices with regard to assignments of trades and operational issues associated with confirmation backlogs.
Indeed, some central banks have created "financial stability" staff groups to oversee such monitoring and, in some cases, to publish regular financial stability reports.
In the event that such monitoring suggests that the operations of some institutions or markets are under significant strain and, importantly, that the resulting pressures on businesses and households could have a material adverse effect on the real economy, the central bank may want to respond by adjusting the stance of monetary policy.
Finally, financial innovations may on occasion warrant new regulations because financial institutions either cannot or will not manage the associated risks appropriately.
Indeed, regulation should be seen as part of the broader "infrastructure" that supports both financial stability and innovation, and like other more traditional infrastructure, regulatory regimes have to keep up.
For example, developments in financial markets and advances in the ability of banks to measure and manage their risks have increasingly made the existing capital regulation of the largest banks, the 1988 Basel Accord, look antiquated.
Basel II is a more flexible framework than Basel I and is intended to better permit capital regulation to keep up with financial market innovations in the future.
To conclude, I wish to emphasize that policymakers should have a bias toward trusting financial markets to manage the introduction of new products and the development of new institutions smoothly and without undue stress to the financial system.
However, we cannot take such an outcome for granted: Financial firms may not consider the effects of their decisions on the stability of other firms or on the broader financial markets, and some may lack the incentives and ability to learn about and manage the risks induced by financial innovations.
I would note that a significant number of substantial shocks to financial markets have occurred in recent years--including, for example, the difficulties at Long-Term Capital Management and the unexpected and massive fraud at some high-profile companies--and yet the broader effects on the real economy have ultimately been quite small.
Alertness and knowledge on the part of policymakers would go a long way toward ensuring that our positive recent track record will carry on amid what I am sure will continue to be a rapidly changing financial landscape.

I want to discuss with you today some recent and ongoing regulatory issues that are likely of interest to this audience.
These issues include efforts to enhance our regulatory capital regime, compliance risk management, and consumer protection.
First of all, you probably heard the good news yesterday that the Federal Reserve Board reviewed and in an open Board meeting approved a draft of the interagency notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) on the Basel II capital framework.
The final NPR is expected to be issued in the Federal Register once all of the U.S.
We look forward to comments on the NPR; they will be an important contribution to the assessment of Basel II objectives and implementation of the framework.
In some areas, the agencies are still grappling with what the correct approach is.
All of this will help us as we continue to develop the framework.
But before commenting further on the NPR and the U.S.
The current Basel I capital framework, adopted nearly twenty years ago, has served us well, but has become increasingly inadequate for large, internationally active banks that are offering ever-more complex and sophisticated products and services.
We need a revised capital framework for these large, internationally active banks, and we believe that Basel II is such a framework.
One of the major improvements in Basel II is the closer linking of capital requirements and risk.
The current Basel I measures are not very risk-sensitive and do not provide bankers, supervisors, or the marketplace with meaningful measures of risk at large, complex organizations.
Under Basel I, it is possible for two banks with dramatically different risk profiles in their commercial loan portfolio to have the same regulatory capital requirement, and a bank's capital requirement does not reflect deterioration in asset quality.
In addition, the balance-sheet focus of Basel I does not adequately capture risks of certain off-balance-sheet transactions and fee-based activity--for example, the operational risk embedded in many of the services from which many large U.S.
In addition to enhancing the meaningfulness of regulatory capital measures, Basel II should make the financial system safer by substantially improving risk management at banks.
Basel II builds on the risk-management approaches of well-managed banks and creates incentives for banks to move toward leading risk-measurement and risk-management practices.
By providing a consistent framework for all banks to use, supervisors will more readily be able to identify portfolios and banks whose risk management and risk levels are significantly different from the range seen in other banks.
By communicating these differences to banks, management will be able to benchmark their risk assessments, models, and processes in a more detailed and regular manner.
We have already seen some progress in risk management at many institutions in the United States and around the globe as a result of preparations for Basel II.
The new framework is also much more consistent with the internal capital measures that institutions use to manage their business.
Basel II can also provide supervisors with a more conceptually consistent and more transparent framework for assessing the link between risk and capital over time at our most complex institutions; identifying which institutions have deficiencies; and evaluating systemic risk in the banking system through credit cycles.
Therefore, Basel II establishes a more coherent relationship between how supervisors assess regulatory capital and how they supervise the banks, enabling examiners to better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent capital levels, given their risk profiles, and to better understand differences among institutions.
As a central bank and supervisor of banks, bank holdings companies, and financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Basel II framework delivers a strong and risk-sensitive base of capital.
That is why we support safeguards to ensure strong capital levels during the transition to Basel II, and will remain vigilant in monitoring Basel II's impact on an ongoing basis.
To be quite clear, the Federal Reserve believes that strong capital is critical to the health of our banking system and we believe that Basel II will help us continue to ensure that U.S.
banks maintain capital levels that serve as an appropriate cushion against risk-taking.
As we have mentioned before, we will continue to use existing prudential measures to complement Basel II.
For example, the current leverage ratio requirement--a ratio of capital to total assets--will remain unchanged for all banks, whether or not they are subject to the Basel II framework.
Also, supervisors will continue to enforce existing prompt-corrective-action rules in response to declines in capital.
agencies, just as their counterparts in other countries, have exercised national discretion and tailored the Basel II framework to fit the U.S.
agencies continue to propose that we implement only the advanced approaches of Basel II, namely the advanced internal-ratings-based approach (AIRB) for credit risk and the advanced measurement approaches (AMA) for operational risk.
agencies are proposing three transition floors, below which minimum required capital under Basel II will not be permitted to fall, relative to the general risk-based capital rules.
Part of the justification for implementing more rigorous floors stemmed from the lessons we learned from the fourth quantitative impact study (QIS4) conducted in the United States in 2004.
As I have said before, QIS4 was not intended to reflect the ultimate impact of Basel II on U.S.
institutions--particularly since it was not based on a complete proposal and bank inputs to QIS4 were not based on fully developed systems or full supervisory guidance.
Rather, it was conducted on a "best-efforts basis" to provide a snapshot for gauging progress toward implementation of Basel II and to give the U.S.
QIS4 results showed that, in general, data histories were not long enough to capture weaker parts of the economic cycle, especially for LGDs, which must reflect downturn conditions.
As a result, the agencies have provided a supervisory mapping function for those institutions unable to estimate downturn LGDs.
The mapping function takes average LGDs and "stresses" them to generate an input to the capital calculation that is better suited to the Basel II formulas and produces a more appropriate capital requirement.
The Federal Reserve believes this supervisory mapping function is a necessary component of Basel II because it appears difficult for some banks to produce internal estimates of LGD that are sufficient for risk-based capital purposes.
I hope it is clear from the NPR and other statements made by the agencies that we are committed to ongoing, detailed analysis to ensure that U.S.
implementation of Basel II achieves a strong and risk-sensitive base of minimum regulatory capital.
We need to ensure that the items we identified as incomplete in QIS4 are appropriately addressed, and we also need to ensure that additional areas will not inadvertently lower capital levels.
We intend to conduct thorough analysis of each institution's Basel II capital results and the impact on aggregate capital in the U.S.
regulators are united in their belief that no bank should be permitted to operate under Basel II until it has proven itself ready to do so.
For instance, a bank will be able to move from the parallel run to live capital calculations with a 95 percent floor only after its primary supervisor has given it permission to do so after having thoroughly evaluated its risk-management methodologies and its ability to calculate minimum regulatory capital using the new framework.
Similarly, a bank will need approval to move to each of the other two floor levels.
After the third floor period, a bank will be allowed to move to the full Basel II minimum capital calculation without floors upon a finding by the primary supervisor that it is ready, following a rigorous qualification process.
Before I end my remarks about regulatory capital, I would like to offer some thoughts about ongoing efforts to revise existing regulatory capital rules, known as Basel I.
First of all, we expect only one or two dozen banks to move to Basel II in the near term.
banks would be able to continue operating safely and profitably under Basel I as amended through the rulemaking process.
The Basel I framework has already been amended more than twenty-five times in response to changes in the banking environment and a better understanding of the risks of individual products and services.
Concerns have been raised about potential competitive inequities between Basel II banks and Basel I banks.
In an effort to mitigate those concerns, regulators have proposed changes to enhance the risk sensitivity of U.S.
Basel I rules and remain vigilant about potential competitive distortions that might be created by introducing Basel II.
We are also mindful that amendments to Basel I should not be too complex or too burdensome for the multitude of smaller banks to which the revised rules will apply.
The intent is to allow banks and others to review both NPRs before both sets of rules are finalized.
In that way, bankers from potential opt-in institutions and those not planning to move to Basel II can evaluate the potential impact of Basel II in light of the proposed Basel I amendments.
Finally, I would like to underscore that both regulatory capital proposals being worked on by the U.S.
Accordingly, our proposals could change based on comments received or new information gathered by the U.S.
This is especially true for the Basel II proposal, which represents a substantial and complex change in bank supervision and regulation.
In this respect, I would like to echo the comments made earlier this month by Comptroller John Dugan: if the U.S.
agencies see that Basel II is not accurately reflecting risk or is producing unacceptable capital levels, we will seek to make changes.
Indeed, we expect to make some adjustments as we move forward, just as changes have been made to Basel I over the years to reflect changes in bank practice and improvements in supervision.
"Compliance-risk" can be defined as the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, financial loss, or damage to an organization's reputation and franchise value.
This type of risk may result when an organization fails to comply with the laws, regulations, or standards or codes of conduct that are applicable to its business activities and functions.
The Federal Reserve expects each banking organization to have a compliance culture in place across the whole institution and an infrastructure that can identify and control the compliance risks it faces, along with appropriate rewards and penalties for business managers who oversee the compliance risk.
I also emphasize the need for the board of directors and senior management to ensure that staff members throughout their organizations understand the compliance objectives and each member's role in implementing the compliance program.
An integrated approach to compliance-risk management can be particularly effective for Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money-laundering (BSA/AML) compliance.
Often, the identification of a BSA/AML risk or deficiency in one business activity can indicate potential problems or concerns in other activities across the organization.
Controlling BSA/AML risk continues to be a primary concern for banking organizations.
We recognize the commitment that organizations have made to compliance with BSA/AML requirements, and, in return, we continue to work to ensure that obligations in this area are clearly communicated to banking organizations and examiners alike.
The Federal Reserve strives to provide clear and comprehensive guidance that directly communicates our expectations to the institutions we supervise, so that institutions do not need to rely on, for example, their own interpretations of public enforcement cases, which are not intended to serve as industry-wide compliance guidance.
The Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) BSA/AML Examination Manual issued last year is one example of our interagency efforts to clearly communicate our expectations.
The FFIEC BSA/AML Examination Manual reflects a common view of the federal banking agencies and the Treasury Department's Financial Crimes Enforcement Network (FinCEN) with regard to BSA/AML compliance expectations.
The agencies universally stress that the purpose of a BSA/AML examination is to assess the overall adequacy of a banking organization's BSA/AML controls, in view of that particular organization's lines of business and customer mix.
For example, the interagency Money Laundering Threat Assessment (4.1MB PDF) is one step we have taken--with fifteen other U.S.
The Federal Reserve also cares greatly about consumer protection, as should bankers when they are assembling a broad risk-management strategy.
Nontraditional mortgages allow borrowers to defer payment of principal and, sometimes, interest.
While the proposed guidance focuses on banks' ability to adequately identify, measure, monitor, and control the risk associated with these products, it also addresses consumer protection.
Nontraditional mortgages, including "interest-only" mortgages and "payment-option" adjustable-rate mortgages, have been available for many years, and are beneficial for some borrowers because of the payment flexibility they offer.
Moreover, institutions are combining these nontraditional loans with other practices, such as reduced documentation of income and assets in evaluating applicants' creditworthiness.
Many borrowers may not fully recognize the risks of nontraditional mortgages, particularly "payment shock" when the loan's interest rate increases, or when the consumer is required to make fully amortizing payments.
Negative amortization coupled with flattening, or even lower, housing prices could make it difficult for some borrowers to refinance or sell the property to avoid payment shock.
In addition to ensuring that institutions comply with the Truth in Lending Act and other applicable laws, the draft guidance urges institutions to ensure that their advertisements, promotional materials, and oral communications are consistent with the product terms and that these communications provide clear, balanced, and timely information about the risks.
This is important so that consumers have the information they need at critical decision times, such as when selecting a loan product or choosing a specific payment option each month.
For interest-only and payment option ARMs, the payment schedule shows consumers how their payments will increase to include amortization of the principal.
The proposed interagency guidance describes how institutions can use their promotional materials to provide better information about the features and risks of these products, especially the risk of payment shock.
For example, the guidance recommends that institutions' promotional materials inform consumers about the maximum monthly payment they could be required to pay once interest-rate caps and negative-amortization caps have been reached.
When negative amortization is possible, the guidance suggests that institutions alert consumers about the consequences of increasing principal balances and decreasing home equity.
If both reduced-documentation and full-documentation loan programs are offered, the draft guidance advises institutions to inform consumers if they will pay a pricing premium for the reduced-documentation loan.
When institutions provide monthly statements with payment options, they are urged to include on the statement information that enables borrowers to make responsible choices, by explaining each payment option and the impact of each choice.
In addition to the draft nontraditional mortgages, the Federal Reserve Board plans to hold several public hearings this summer on home-equity lending.
The hearings also likely will address issues related to predatory lending and market developments since 2002, when the Board last revised its rules for higher-priced loans under the Home Ownership and Equity Protection Act (HOEPA).
Concerns about predatory lending continue to be raised, and the hearings could explore the impact of the HOEPA rule changes on abusive lending practices as well as on the availability of subprime credit.
In carrying out its role as central bank and banking supervisor, the Federal Reserve must continue to ensure that banking institutions operate in a safe and sound manner with a strong capital base.
organizations, the Federal Reserve believes that the current regulatory capital regime is insufficient.
The Basel II framework, we believe, provides more risk sensitivity and a much better link between capital and risk--especially for complex products, services and processes--promotes advanced risk management practices and improves transparency to supervisors, bankers, and markets about the nature of risk exposures and risk management.
Beyond our work on regulatory capital, we encourage institutions to focus on overall improvements in risk management, of which compliance-risk management is an important element.
One key message is to continue to make sure the compliance process reflects the changing product and customer mix of the financial institution.
Another is that as institutions provide more complex products with features that are not as familiar to the customer, the organization must also improve the clarity of its communications with customers.

Today, I will speak about the importance of risk management and its relationship to capital.
Over the past several decades, we have witnessed substantial changes in the U.S.
The largest institutions have moved away from the traditional banking strategy of holding assets on the balance sheet and have adopted strategies that emphasize redistribution of assets and active management of risks.
The risk-management techniques employed by banking organizations continue to improve and adapt to the ever-changing financial landscape.
The Federal Reserve, in its role as both a bank supervisor and the nation's central bank, has an obvious interest in maintaining the stability of the banking industry and the financial system as a whole.
bank and thrift regulatory agencies, are responsible for ensuring that banking institutions operate in a safe and sound manner and have strong capital levels.
But with the advent of very large banking organizations that engage in a wide variety of business activities--some of them quite complex--the Federal Reserve has become even more interested in ensuring that banking organizations understand the risks of these activities.
For their part, bankers continue to improve the risk-management and risk-measurement processes at their institutions, and regulators have supported these efforts.
Banks themselves have created many of the new techniques to improve their risk management and internal economic capital measures in order to be more effective competitors and to control and manage their losses.
By more clearly defining risk exposures and identifying the causes of and controls for their losses, bank management can more effectively integrate decisions about risk-taking into their strategic and tactical decisionmaking.
Banks that integrate risk measurement into their business-line goals often find that this effort helps them to implement their strategic plans more effectively.
Ideally, an institution should use a systematic approach to identify and measure its risk exposures; however, even the best processes for evaluating and measuring risk suffer if flawed data are used.
To conduct a credible internal analysis of relevant risks, institutions should identify which risks can generally be quantified and which ones cannot.
When risk measurements are based on scarce or incomplete data, or on unproven quantitative tools, institutions might need to use sensitivity analyses, stress tests, or scenario analyses to a greater extent in order to develop meaningful risk measures.
Banks that wish to remain competitive must keep up with the latest developments in risk measurement and management.
Bankers must ensure that their models keep up with current practice and continue to capture risks accurately, especially as new activities and new products are introduced.
Similarly, the supervisory community needs to keep up with developments in banking and finance.
We consider this vitally important because banking is and will remain a highly dynamic industry.
Supervisors will have to pay attention to evolving sound practices and ensure that new regulations do not unduly inhibit banks from adopting new banking practices and financial instruments.
Our focus on balancing developments in the industry with safe and sound operations at institutions is increasingly important, given the growing complexity, sophistication, and concentration of today's banking system.
And with the advent of Basel II, which is intended to update capital rules for large, internationally active U.S.
banking organizations, supervisors must become even more involved in understanding emerging sound practices in risk measurement and management.
One of the most important sound practices for a banking organization is the tying of risk exposures to capital.
Banks that use similar risk models can have very different risk exposures.
That is why the Basel II approach to capital is so important.
Basel II provides a framework in which the risk level banks choose to accept is reflected in their capital.
Banks with higher loss exposures will be required to hold more capital than those who have lower risk appetites.
This provides a strong relationship with risk management, in that returns earned in riskier business lines will necessarily be higher to cover the cost of the additional capital held.
Focusing now on operational risk, one of the most substantial changes in the U.S.
These new activities include securitizing loan portfolios, with the bank retaining responsibility for loan servicing; buying and selling financial instruments for customers; and other business lines that generate revenue by charging customers transaction and account processing fees.
These activities generate little balance-sheet exposure, but they present the potential for large losses if the complex systems and financial deals associated with them are not managed in a sound manner.
Operational risks are also becoming more important in the large, complex financial institution as more technology and automated processes are used in all areas of operations.
When banks used manual processes, errors were confined to the limited area where the employee worked.
Recent history provides us with ample evidence that operational risk can be significant.
Large financial institutions have reported operational losses from breakdowns in operating controls that, in some cases, have exceeded their credit- or market-related losses.
In the area of legal risk, for example, many institutions have learned that failing to identify and promptly correct problems can result in losses that significantly exceed management's initial expectations.
Over the past decade, large financial institutions have experienced more than 100 operational loss events in excess of $100 million each; some of these individual operational losses, resulting from fraud, rogue trading, and settlements stemming from questionable business practices, have exceeded $1 billion.
As you know, analysts at the main rating agencies are placing increasing importance on operational risk when they assess a bank's credit ratings.
What remains critically important is how these approaches are combined in the implementation of an effective process for identifying, measuring, managing, and controlling operational risk throughout an organization.
Effective operational-risk measurement tools enable the executive management at the largest banking organizations to make better risk-and-return decisions, thereby enhancing the return on their institution's capital investments.
By considering operational risk as part of their assessment of capital requirements and true profitability, corporate decisionmakers can better decide which business lines to invest in or shut down.
The organization further benefits when operational-risk measurement is integrated with the management processes of individual business units, because this helps communicate risk-management issues to the business lines.
The allocation of operational-risk capital to these units provides them with a financial incentive to reduce the chance of operational losses.
There are potential longer-term benefits as well, including: a reduction in operational losses as control weaknesses are identified and improved; fewer errors and breaks in customer service, which can lead to higher customer satisfaction and retention; stronger information security and customer data privacy; higher credit ratings, and increased operational efficiency.
One objective of Basel II is to enhance practices at our largest and most complex banking organizations for identifying operational risk exposures and ensuring that these exposures are appropriately supported by regulatory capital.
Importantly, the advanced measurement approach (AMA) for operational risk under Basel II allows banks to use a framework that relies on their own qualifying methodologies for identifying operational-loss events and measuring risk exposure in order to determine their operational-risk regulatory capital requirements.
In this way, the AMA gives banks the flexibility to continue developing and incorporating evolving sound practices for operational-risk measurement and management into their AMA frameworks.
In the context of Basel II, it has often been argued that measuring operational risk is much more difficult than measuring market or credit risk; however, any model intended to capture unexpected loss has its challenges.
Credit-risk models need to consider downturn estimates for loss given default, which can depend on the severity of the economic downturn and the price of collateral.
Similarly, operational-risk models need to address potential losses that may not have occurred during the short period that most institutions have been collecting internal operational-loss data.
For example, we have seen frameworks that use scenario analyses, risk self-assessments, and the judgment of senior business managers in innovative ways.
First, with respect to operational-loss data, Basel II banks face the challenge of establishing credible operational-loss databases that they can use in determining their regulatory capital requirement for operational risk.
The advanced approaches under Basel II create a link between regulatory capital and risk management.
Banks using an AMA for operational risk will be required to adopt more-formal, quantitative risk-measurement and risk-management procedures and processes.
These standards are consistent with broader supervisory expectations that high-quality risk management at large complex organizations depends on credible data--and not just for Basel II.
Data are needed for all models and risk measures used in financial services, including credit-scoring models, market-based measures such as KMV, and value-at-risk and other economic capital models.
The emphasis in Basel II on improved data standards, therefore, should not be interpreted solely as a requirement to determine regulatory capital standards but rather as a foundation for risk-management practices that will strengthen the value of the banking franchise.
As I mentioned earlier, regulators view capital from the perspective of ensuring safety and soundness in the financial system.
But individual financial institutions generally focus on capital, in particular economic capital, as a means for evaluating the profitability of their activities, defining their risk appetite, and setting risk limits.
Although the goals differ, there are important linkages between firms' efforts to quantify operational-risk capital for regulatory capital purposes and for strategic decisionmaking.
To the extent the operational-loss data considered in banks' internal economic capital models appropriately reflect the banks' risk exposures, banks should be able to leverage their economic capital data collection efforts to measure their operational-risk exposure under an AMA.
This leverage is also consistent with the Basel II objective of better aligning regulatory capital with banks' internal economic capital.
As many of you are aware, Basel II contains a provision whereby banks using an advanced measurement approach for operational risk could adjust their calculated operational-risk exposure to reflect reductions due to operational-risk mitigants, such as insurance, subject to certain limitations.
To the extent banks want to reduce their operational-risk capital charge through the use of insurance, banks must analyze and demonstrate the relationship between specific losses and the ability to collect from the insurer.
At the time of the Loss Data Collection Exercise, banks that incorporated insurance benefits into their operational risk capital calculations appeared to do so through an ex-post adjustment to their capital figure in the aggregate, rather than by embedding the specific effects of insurance into the AMA modeling process itself.
We expect operational risk managers to work closely with their insurance managers to make better decisions about insurance coverage.
While work remains for those banks that are building their AMA frameworks, we have seen, and continue to see, significant progress in these AMA development efforts.
As you know, internal loss-event data are a key input for determining an institution's regulatory capital requirement for operational risk.
The agencies have provided feedback to participating institutions that should help them in their continuing AMA development efforts.
In addition, the agencies continue to analyze the loss data in an effort to provide the industry with additional insights relating to operational-risk quantification.
I have referred to certain parts of the Basel II framework in my remarks so far, mostly relating to operational risk and the AMA.
Now I would like to give a brief update on where we stand with implementing Basel II in the United States, as well as with amending the current Basel I regime.
First of all, you may have heard that tomorrow the Federal Reserve Board plans to review a draft of the interagency Basel II notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR) at a public meeting, meaning that a draft NPR will also be made available to the public at that time.
The final NPR is expected to be issued in the Federal Register after all of the U.S.
We also recognize the extent to which the industry, Congress, and others have anticipated the release of this document--and the greater detail it contains about Basel II in the United States.
I think it is helpful, as we anticipate release of the NPR, to review the reasons we are developing U.S.
The current Basel I capital framework, adopted nearly twenty years ago, has served us well but has become increasingly inadequate for large, internationally active banks offering ever-more complex and sophisticated products and services.
We need a revised capital framework for these banks, and we believe that Basel II is such a framework.
One of the major ways in which Basel II should improve safety and soundness is by more closely linking capital requirements to risk.
The current Basel I measures are not very risk sensitive and do not provide meaningful measures to bankers, supervisors, or the marketplace for complex banking organizations.
Under Basel I, it is possible for two banks with dramatically different risk profiles to have the same minimum capital requirement, and a bank's capital requirement does not reflect deterioration in asset quality.
In addition, the balance-sheet focus of Basel I does not adequately capture risks of certain off-balance-sheet transactions and fee-based activity--for example, the operational risk embedded in the services from which many large U.S.
In addition to enhancing the meaningfulness of regulatory capital measures, Basel II should make the financial system safer by substantially improving risk management at banks.
Basel II builds on the risk-management approaches of well-managed banks and creates incentives for banks to move toward leading risk-measurement and risk-management practices; we have already seen some progress in risk management at many institutions in the United States and around the globe as a result of discussions about and preparations for Basel II.
The new framework is also much more consistent with the internal capital measures that institutions use to manage their business.
Basel II can also provide supervisors with a more conceptually consistent and more transparent framework for assessing the linkage of risk and capital over time at our most complex institutions; identifying which institutions have deficiencies; and, ultimately, evaluating systemic risk in the banking system.
Therefore, Basel II establishes a more coherent relationship between how supervisors assess regulatory capital and how they supervise the banks, enabling examiners to better evaluate whether banks are holding prudent capital levels, given their risk profiles, and to better understand differences across institutions.
Compared with the current framework, Basel II is more able to accommodate new products and transaction types and to provide meaningful capital measures for the risks embedded therein.
As the central bank and the supervisor of banks, bank holding companies, and financial holding companies, the Federal Reserve is committed to ensuring that the Basel II framework delivers a strong and risk-sensitive base of capital.
That is why we support safeguards to ensure strong capital levels during the transition to Basel II, and why we will remain vigilant in monitoring the ongoing impact of Basel II.
To be quite clear, the Federal Reserve believes that strong capital is fundamentally important to the health of our banking system.
We believe Basel II will be a strong contributor to our tradition of ensuring that U.S.
banks maintain capital levels that provide an appropriate cushion against risk-taking.
As we have stated before, we will continue to use existing prudential measures to complement Basel II.
For example, the current leverage ratio requirement--a ratio of capital to total assets--will remain unchanged for all banks, whether or not they are subject to the Basel II framework.
Also, supervisors will continue to enforce existing prompt-corrective-action-requirements in response to declines in capital.
Before I end my remarks about regulatory capital, I would like to offer some thoughts about ongoing efforts to revise existing regulatory capital rules, known as Basel I.
First of all, we expect only one or two dozen banks to move to Basel II in the near term.
banks would be able to continue operating safely and soundly under Basel I, as it is amended through the rulemaking process.
The Basel I framework already has been amended more than twenty times in response to changes in the banking industry and a better understanding of the risks in individual products and services.
Concerns have been raised about potential competitive inequities between Basel II banks and Basel I banks.
In an effort to mitigate those concerns, regulators have proposed changes to enhance the risk sensitivity of U.S.
Basel I rules and remain vigilant about potential competitive distortions that might be created by introducing Basel II rules.
We are also mindful that amendments to Basel I should not be too complex or too burdensome for the multitude of smaller banks to which the revised rules will apply.
The intent is to allow banks and others to review both NPRs before both sets of rules are finalized.
In that way, bankers from potential opt-in institutions and from those not planning to move to Basel II can evaluate the potential impact of Basel II in light of the proposed Basel I amendments.
As prudent supervisors, we need to ensure that banks have strong capital levels--whether banks operate under our current rules, revisions to our current rules, or Basel II.
Our focus will continue to be on ensuring that risk-management processes are appropriate for operations of each institution and that those risk systems operate effectively.
Our challenge as regulators is to work with the industry in developing an effective capital framework.
We envision Basel II as a significant step toward a more risk-sensitive capital framework.

Before the Economic Club of New York, New York, New York
I would like to thank the Economic Club of New York for inviting me to speak here this evening.
I intend to take the opportunity afforded by an audience of experts on global financial markets to address an intriguing financial phenomenon: the fact that, over the past seven quarters or so, tightening monetary policy has been accompanied by long-term yields that have moved only a little on net.
Why have long-term interest rates not risen more, as they have done over previous policy tightening cycles? And what implications does this pattern of long-term interest rates have for monetary policy and the economic outlook? As you will see, in my remarks I will do a better job of raising questions than of answering them.
In particular, I will conclude that the implications for monetary policy of the recent behavior of long-term yields are not at all clear-cut.
I hope you will agree that these questions are nevertheless worthwhile posing, as they are intertwined with a number of important economic and financial issues.
I should say at the outset that the views I will express are my own and are not necessarily shared by my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC).
The FOMC kept policy unusually accommodative for an extended, or should I say for a considerable, period.
The goal, as you know, was to help ensure that the economic expansion would be self-sustaining and to protect against a remote risk that the fall in inflation observed during 2003 might culminate in outright deflation--an outcome that could have had potentially serious consequences for the economy and for the efficacy of monetary policy.
Indeed, with those concerns in mind, in 2003 the Federal Reserve made explicit for the first time that price stability is a symmetric objective: It is important to avoid inflation that is too low as well as inflation that is too high.
A second way in which the most recent experience has been unusual is the extent to which policy actions have been signaled in advance.
Both in the months leading up to the initiation of the tightening cycle and during the cycle itself, the statements issued after each meeting of the FOMC provided qualitative guidance about the likely future path of policy and its dependence on economic events.
Providing information about the expected path of policy helped to ensure that long-term interest rates and other asset prices did not build in a projected pace of tightening that was more rapid than the Committee itself anticipated, and the statement's focus on the conditionality of future policy actions emphasized the ongoing need for both policymakers and financial market participants to respond to economic news.
In retrospect, the clear communication of policy provided notable benefits, in my view, by increasing the effectiveness of monetary policy while minimizing unnecessary volatility in financial markets.
Third, policy moved gradually, tightening in one-quarter point increments over fourteen successive meetings.
Together with expanded communication, this gradual approach served to stabilize policy expectations and damp market volatility.
In addition, the measured pace of rate increases gave the Committee time to observe the progress of the economy and to adjust its plans and communications strategy accordingly.1 To be sure, gradualism was possible only because inflation expectations remained contained--testimony to the importance of a central bank's retaining credibility in financial markets and among businesses and households.
A fourth interesting aspect of the latest tightening cycle, which is my principal focus this evening, is the behavior of long-term interest rates.
Since June 30, 2004, the overnight interest rate has moved up 3-1/2 percentage points, but the ten-year nominal Treasury yield has only edged higher.
At less than 4-3/4 percent, that yield is not much above the target federal funds rate of 4-1/2 percent and, indeed, is about even with yields for maturities of one to three years.
The ten-year Treasury yield, for example, can be viewed as a weighted average of the current one-year rate and nine one-year forward rates, with the weights depending on the coupon yield of the security.
As I will discuss, each of these forward rates can be split further into (1) a portion equal to the one-year spot rate that market participants currently expect to prevail at the corresponding date in the future, and (2) a portion that reflects additional compensation to the bondholder for the risk of holding longer-dated instruments.
Current and near-term forward rates are particularly sensitive to monetary policy actions, which directly affect spot short-term interest rates and strongly influence market expectations of where spot rates are likely to stand in the next year or two.
Indeed, as we would expect, the recent tightening of policy has been accompanied by increases in both the current one-year rate and next few years' forward rates.
For example, since June 2004, the one-year forward rate for the period two to three years in the future has risen almost 1-1/2 percentage points.
In fact, the one-year forward rate nine years ahead has declined 1-1/2 percentage points over this tightening cycle.
Incidentally, by comparing forward rates implied by yields on nominal Treasuries with those implied by Treasury securities that are indexed for inflation, we can infer that about two-thirds of the overall decline in far-distant nominal forward rates over this tightening cycle has been associated with a drop in real yields, with the remainder reflecting a drop in inflation compensation.
It is important to note that the marked decline in far-forward interest rates has not been confined to U.S.
The spread in yields between Treasuries and longer-term private securities such as corporate bonds is little changed or is down on net since June 2004, implying that essentially all of the fall in forward rates seen in the Treasury market has occurred in private yields as well.
These patterns have also appeared in securities not denominated in dollars.
For example, over the same period, longer-term government and swap yields in the United Kingdom and the euro area have moved appreciably lower.
Indeed, long-term nominal yields have dropped in a number of countries, often by more than in the United States, and the yield curves in many of these countries are also rather flat or even slightly inverted.
Why have the far-forward rates implied by the term structure of interest rates declined in recent years? Observers have offered two broad (and not mutually exclusive) classes of explanations.
Another set focuses on special factors that may have influenced market demands for long-term securities per se, independent of the economic outlook.
I will first consider explanations that emphasize possible changes in the net demand for long-term securities and later return to explanations that focus on the link between bond yields and the economic outlook.
As I have noted, each of the forward interest rates implicit in the term structure can be usefully decomposed into two parts: (1) the spot interest rate that market participants currently expect to prevail at the corresponding date in the future and (2) the additional compensation that investors require for the risk of holding longer-term instruments, known as the term premium.
With the economic outlook held constant, changes in the net demand for long-term securities have their largest effect on the term premium.
In particular, if the demand for long-dated securities rises relative to the supply, then investors will generally accept less compensation to hold longer-term instruments--that is, the term premium will decline.
To quantify the importance of the shift in the balance of demand and supply and of the consequent change in the term premium, we can appeal to the research literature on the term structure of interest rates.
In some models, these factors can be explicitly tied to observable economic variables, such as inflation; in other models, the factors represent statistical summaries of the data and have no explicit economic interpretations.
According to several of the most popular models, a substantial portion of the decline in distant-horizon forward rates over recent quarters can be attributed to a drop in term premiums.2 Using some of these models, we can further divide the term premium into two parts--a premium for bearing real interest rate risk and a premium for bearing inflation risk.
Both of these components have trended lower over time as well, according to the standard models, but the decline in the premium since last June 2004 appears to have been associated mainly with a drop in the compensation for bearing real interest rate risk.
First, longer-maturity obligations may be more attractive because of more stable inflation, better-anchored inflation expectations, and a reduction in economic volatility more generally.
With the benefit of hindsight, we now recognize that an important change occurred in the U.S.
economy (and, indeed, in other major industrial economies as well) sometime in the mid-1980s.
Since that time, the volatilities of both real GDP growth and inflation have declined significantly, a phenomenon that economists have dubbed the "Great Moderation." I have argued elsewhere that improved monetary policies, which stabilized inflation and better anchored inflation expectations, are an important reason for this positive development; no doubt, structural changes in the economy such as deregulation, improved inventory control methods, and better risk-sharing in financial markets also contributed.3 Whatever the reason for the fall in macroeconomic volatility, if investors have come to expect this past performance to continue, they might believe that less compensation for risk--and thus a lower term premium--is required to justify holding longer-term bonds.
With long-term inflation expectations apparently anchored at low levels and with the prospect of continued economic stability, market participants may believe that it is appropriate to price bonds for an environment like that which prevailed four or five decades ago.
According to this explanation, foreign official institutions, primarily central banks, have invested the bulk of their greatly expanded dollar holdings in U.S.
This interpretation has some support, including research that I did with two coauthors that found that longer-term yields came under significant downward pressure during episodes of heavy official purchases of dollars in 2004.4 And financial-market participants appear to be especially sensitive to any suggestion that foreign official entities may alter their portfolio preferences.
However, these observations speak more to the existence of a short-term impact of large purchases and sales--the result of limits to liquidity in the very short run--than to the perhaps more important question of whether those transactions have a lasting effect on yields.
Several pieces of indirect evidence suggest that the long-term effect of foreign purchases on yields may be moderate.
Notably, the global market for dollar-denominated bonds is enormous--perhaps around $25 trillion, including dollar-denominated debt issued by other countries as well as debt issued abroad by U.S.
In the long run, therefore, the market should be able to absorb purchases and sales of large absolute magnitude with relatively modest changes in yields.
Indeed, long-term yields continued to fall over recent quarters even as foreign official holdings of Treasury securities increased at a slower pace than previously.
The performance of Treasuries relative to that of other fixed-income instruments also argues against a dominant influence of foreign official portfolio decisions on long-term rates.
If foreign official holdings of Treasuries were the source of the decline in their yields, then we would expect to observe increased spreads between yields on Treasury securities and the returns to other types of debt less favored by foreign official holders.
But we have not seen a significant widening of private yield spreads relative to Treasuries--quite the contrary--and, as I noted earlier, yields in other industrial economies have fallen as well, in many cases by more than U.S.
A reasonable conclusion is that the accumulation of dollar reserves abroad has influenced U.S.
yields, but reserve accumulation abroad is not the only, or even the dominant, explanation for their recent behavior.
Changes in the management of and accounting for pension funds are a third possible source of a declining term premium.
Reforms proposed in the United States, Europe, and elsewhere are widely expected to encourage pension funds to be more fully funded and to take steps to better match the duration of their assets and liabilities.
Together with the increased need of aging populations in the industrial countries to prepare for retirement, these changes may have increased the demand for longer-maturity securities.
We have seen little direct evidence to date of sizable pension-fund portfolio shifts toward long-duration bonds, at least in the United States.
Fourth and finally, as investors' demands for long-duration securities may have increased over the past few years, the supply of such securities seems not to have kept pace.
What does the historically unusual behavior of long-term yields imply for the conduct of monetary policy? The answer, it turns out, depends critically on the source of that behavior.
To the extent that the decline in forward rates can be traced to a decline in the term premium, perhaps for one or more of the reasons I have just suggested, the effect is financially stimulative and argues for greater monetary policy restraint, all else being equal.
Specifically, if spending depends on long-term interest rates, special factors that lower the spread between short-term and long-term rates will stimulate aggregate demand.
Thus, when the term premium declines, a higher short-term rate is required to obtain the long-term rate and the overall mix of financial conditions consistent with maximum sustainable employment and stable prices.
However, if the behavior of long-term yields reflects current or prospective economic conditions, the implications for policy may be quite different--indeed, quite the opposite.
The simplest case in point is when low or falling long-term yields reflect investor expectations of future economic weakness.
Suppose, for example, that investors expect economic activity to slow at some point in the future.
If investors expect that weakness to require policy easing in the medium term, they will mark down their projected path of future spot interest rates, lowering far-forward rates and causing the yield curve to flatten or even to invert.
What is the relevance of this scenario for today? Although macroeconomic forecasting is fraught with hazards, I would not interpret the currently very flat yield curve as indicating a significant economic slowdown to come, for several reasons.
First, in previous episodes when an inverted yield curve was followed by recession, the level of interest rates was quite high, consistent with considerable financial restraint.
This time, both short- and long-term interest rates--in nominal and real terms--are relatively low by historical standards.5 Second, as I have already discussed, to the extent that the flattening or inversion of the yield curve is the result of a smaller term premium, the implications for future economic activity are positive rather than negative.6 Finally, the yield curve is only one of the financial indicators that researchers have found useful in predicting swings in economic activity.
Other indicators that have had empirical success in the past, including corporate risk spreads, would seem to be consistent with continuing solid economic growth.
In that regard, the fact that actual and implied volatilities of most financial prices remain subdued suggests that market participants do not harbor significant reservations about the economic outlook.
An alternative perspective holds that the recent behavior of interest rates does not presage an economic slowdown but suggests instead that the level of real interest rates consistent with full employment in the long run--the natural interest rate, if you will--has declined.
For example, some observers have pointed to factors that may create a longer-term drag on the growth in household spending, including high energy costs, the likelihood of slower growth in house prices, and a possible reversal of recent declines in saving rates.
If these drags on the growth of spending do materialize, then a lower real interest rate will be needed to sustain aggregate demand and keep the economy near full employment.
To be consistent with a lower long-term real rate, the short-term policy rate might have to be lower than it would otherwise be as well.
Given the global nature of the decline in yields, an explanation less centered on the United States might be required.
About a year ago, I offered the thesis that a "global saving glut"--an excess, at historically normal real interest rates, of desired global saving over desired global investment--was contributing to the decline in interest rates.7 In brief, I argued that this shift reflects the confluence of several forces.
On the saving side, the factors include rapid growth in high-saving countries on the Pacific Rim, export-focused economic development strategies that directly or indirectly hold back the growth of domestic demand, and the surge in revenues enjoyed by oil producers.
On the investment side, notable factors restraining the global demand for capital include the legacy of the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s, which led to continuing sluggishness in investment in some of those economies, and the slower growth of the workforce in many industrial countries.
So long as these factors persist, global equilibrium interest rates (and, consequently, the neutral policy rate) will be lower than they otherwise would be.
What conclusion should we draw? Clearly, bond prices, like other asset prices, incorporate a great deal of information that is potentially very relevant to policymakers.
However, the information is not always easy to extract and--as in the current situation--the bottom line for policy appears ambiguous.
In particular, to the extent that the recent behavior of long-term rates reflects a declining term premium, the policy rate associated with a given degree of financial stimulus will be higher than usual.
But to the extent that long-term rates have been influenced by macroeconomic conditions, including such factors as trends in global saving and investment, the required policy rate will be lower.
In the context of monetary policy, these principles suggest that policymakers should monitor bond yields carefully in judging the current state of the economy--but only in tandem with the signals from other important financial variables; direct readings on spending, production, and prices; and a goodly helping of qualitative information.
Ultimately, a robust approach to policymaking requires the use of multiple sources of information and multiple methods of analysis, combined with frequent reality checks.
By not tying policy to a small set of forecast indicators, we may sacrifice some degree of simplicity, but we are less likely to be misled when a favored variable behaves in an unusual manner.
 I spoke about this in more detail in "Gradualism," a speech delivered at an economics luncheon co-sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco (Seattle Branch) and the University of Washington, Seattle, May 20, 2004.
Wright (2005), "An Arbitrage-Free Three-Factor Term Structure Model and the Recent Behavior of Long-Term Yields and Distant-Horizon Forward Rates," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2005-33 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, August).
Bernanke (2004), "The Great Moderation," speech delivered at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, D.C., February 20.
Reinhart (2004), "Monetary Policy Alternatives at the Zero Bound: An Empirical Assessment," Brookings Papers on Economic Analysis (2), pp.
Blinder (1992), "The Federal Funds Rate and the Channels of Monetary Transmission," American Economic Review, vol.
In that paper, we found that the level of the federal funds rate was extremely informative about future movements of real macroeconomic variables.
Wright (2006), "The Yield Curve and Predicting Recessions," Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2006-7 (Washington, D.C.: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, March).

At "Monetary Policy: A Journey from Theory to Practice," a European Central Bank Colloquium held in honor of Otmar Issing, Frankfurt, Germany
I can think of no better way to celebrate the signal contributions of this leading force in the world of monetary policymaking than to address an issue of great importance to central banks, and one that has drawn considerable public attention and comment of late--namely, the proper role of asset prices in the determination of monetary policy.
Otmar and I have debated this issue on many occasions, and these discussions--together with recent research carried out at the European Central Bank, the Bank for International Settlements, and elsewhere--have been both challenging and stimulating.
At the outset, let me stress that I will be expressing my own opinions, which are not necessarily shared by my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee.1
Most fluctuations in stock prices, real estate values, and other asset prices pose no particular challenge to central banks, as they are just some of the usual factors influencing the outlook for real activity and inflation.
But many argue that pronounced booms and busts in asset markets are another matter, especially if actual valuations appear to be misaligned with fundamentals.
What should a central bank do when it suspects it faces a major speculative event--one that might be large enough to threaten economic stability when it unwinds? To help frame the discussion, I will focus on two different strategies that have been proposed for dealing with market bubbles.
The first approach--which I will label the conventional strategy--calls for central banks to focus exclusively on the stability of prices and economic activity over the next several years.
Under this policy, a central bank responds to stock prices, home values, and other asset prices only insofar as they have implications for future output and inflation over the medium term.
Importantly, the strategy eschews any attempt to influence the speculative component of asset prices, treating any perceived mis-pricing as, rightly or wrongly, an essentially exogenous process.
If policymakers suspect that a bubble is likely, say, to expand for a time before collapsing, the implications of that possibility for future output and inflation need to be folded into their deliberations.
Despite its approach to perceived speculative activity, the conventional strategy does recognize that monetary policy has an important influence on asset prices--indeed, this influence is at the heart of the transmission of policy decisions to real activity and inflation.
It occurs through standard arbitrage channels, such as the link between interest rates and the discount factor used to value expected future earnings.
It was described at length in "Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy," an article published by the ECB last year.
I quote from the article: "This approach amounts to a cautious policy of 'leaning against the wind' of an incipient bubble.
The central bank would adopt a somewhat tighter policy stance in the face of an inflating asset market than it would otherwise allow if confronted with a similar macroeconomic outlook under more normal market conditions.
It would thus possibly tolerate a certain deviation from its price stability objective in the shorter term in exchange for enhanced prospects of preserving price and economic stability in the future."2 I am labeling this second approach extra action, as it calls for steps that would not be taken in ordinary circumstances.3
Compared with the first approach, the extra-action strategy responds to a perceived speculative boom with tighter monetary policy--and thus lower output and inflation in the near term--with the expectation of significantly mitigating the potential fallout from a possible future bursting of the bubble.
Thus, the strategy seeks to trade off the near-certainty of worse macroeconomic performance today for the chance of disproportionally better performance in the future, on the theory that the repercussions of a major market correction could be highly nonlinear.
But the extra-action proposal is by no means a bold call for central banks to prick market bubbles.
As the ECB article stresses, such an attempt would be extremely dangerous given the risk that a concerted effort at stamping out a speculative boom would lead to outsized interest rate hikes and recession.
I will be talking at length about the differences between the two strategies, but I must stress up front how much they have in common.
Both policies aim to achieve the same general objectives of monetary policy, using the same broad analytic framework.
Most central banks, I believe, share these basic features of monetary policymaking, notwithstanding important differences in their official mandates and the nature of their economies.
At the risk of considerable oversimplification, policymakers can be described as seeking to set policy over time so as to minimize the present value of future deviations of output from potential and inflation from a desired level.
This statement is true whether our institutions have a specific mandate to keep inflation low and stable and output close to potential, as in the United States, or whether our mandate is defined primarily in terms of stabilizing inflation, as in the euro area.
Stabilizing output complements maintaining price stability in the medium to long run, and often in the short run as well.
We also can agree that asset prices play critical and complicated roles in determining real activity and inflation--roles that may be changing over time because an increasing share of wealth is market-determined and easily liquified.
Changes in bond prices, stock prices, and exchange rates imply movements in the cost of capital and relative prices that influence investment and foreign trade; exchange rate movements also directly affect the prices of goods and services.
Finally, asset prices can affect the value of collateral and thus the provision of credit, thereby influencing aggregate spending.
In cases of sharply falling market valuations, these adverse credit-channel effects may even be exacerbated by the deteriorating health of banks and other financial institutions.
In sum, asset prices influence the economy in complex and subtle ways over potentially extended periods of time.
Finally, I think it fair to say that most central banks, faced with only a limited understanding of asset prices and their interactions with the full economy, engage in a form of risk management when dealing with market booms and busts.
In part, they do this because any particular policy under consideration is never associated with a single forecast for the future paths of output and inflation but, instead, with a large set of possible scenarios with differing odds of coming to pass.
Second, there must be a fairly high probability that a modestly tighter policy will help to check the further expansion of speculative activity.
And finally, the expected improvement in future economic performance that would result from a less expansive bubble must be sizable.
For the moment, let me set aside the first condition and assume that central banks can distinguish an emerging bubble from improving fundamentals at an early stage.
What about the other two conditions? Should we presume that a limited application of restrictive policy would materially restrain the speculative boom and make its eventual unwinding less disruptive for the overall economy?
The boom was fueled by a sustained acceleration of productivity and an accompanying rise in corporate profits--fundamental changes that justified a major rise in equity prices.
How high those prices should have risen was difficult to judge in real time because no one, not investors or central bankers, could be sure how fast profits would grow in the future.
But overly optimistic expectations for long-run earnings growth were not being driven by easy money, and I see no reason to believe that an extra 50 or even 100 basis points on the funds rate would have had much of a damping effect on investor beliefs in the potential profitability of emerging technologies.
At present, we just do not have any empirical evidence of a link between interest rates and corporate equity valuation errors, as opposed to standard arbitrage effects.
In general, we have a very poor understanding of the forces driving speculative bubbles and the role played by monetary policy.
In fact, we cannot rule out perverse effects.4 Again, consider the U.S.
When the FOMC tightened in 1999 and early 2000, the trajectory of stock prices actually steepened, and equity premiums fell--perhaps because investors became more confident that good macroeconomic performance would be sustained.
Since mid-2004, we have seen a marked decline in bond-term premiums, even as the funds rate has risen steadily.
These episodes illustrate that risk premiums often move in mysterious ways, and we should not count on the ability of monetary policy to nudge them in the intended direction.
For example, homeowners, who may have a less sophisticated understanding of the economy than professional investors, might mistakenly view a one-time rise in home prices--resulting, say, from a decline in interest rates--as evidence of a more persistent upward trend.
If so, a monetary easing directed at stabilizing output and inflation might, conceivably, drive up real estate values by more than fundamentals alone would merit.
Still, you would expect any mis-pricing from these sources to be reversed over time as interest rates returned to normal.
More broadly, further research into the causal connections, if any, between monetary policy and bubbles would seem to be needed before we would know enough to be able to act on such linkages with much confidence.5
However, let us suppose a situation arises in which we are convinced that tighter policy would check the future expansion of an emerging speculative bubble.
To explain this statement, I note again that extra action with near-certainty weakens the economy and reduces inflation before the bubble bursts in exchange for the chance of better macroeconomic performance in the future.
Admittedly, if the worst-outcome scenario associated with an unchecked bubble is judged sufficiently dire and if the scenario is not seen as too improbable, then a risk-averse policymaker might regard the expected return from extra action insurance as worth its upfront cost.
However, our confidence in such an assessment would seem to hinge on believing that the effects of market corrections could be markedly nonlinear.
Proponents of extra action often cite an increased risk of severe financial distress as a potential source of such effects.
However, without the onset of deflation, how large is this risk? In recent history, the health of the U.S.
financial system remained solid after the collapse of the high-tech boom, despite the bankruptcy of dozens of telecom and dot-com firms, the loss of more than $8 trillion in stock market wealth, and stress in the nonfinancial corporate sector.
Of course, the nonlinear risks associated with a collapsing bubble may depend on the initial health of the financial system, and under some circumstances we could be worried about the potential for significant financial distress to accompany the bursting of a bubble, should that bubble expand further.
Certainly, closer oversight of banking systems during the 1980s, including the United States, would have left many economies in a stronger position during the early 1990s.
This lesson has been absorbed by supervisory authorities around the world, as evidenced by our successful efforts to strengthen bank capital and our financial systems.
I do agree that market corrections can have profoundly adverse consequences if they lead to deflation, as illustrated by the United States after the 1929 stock market crash and the more recent experience of Japan.
But it does not follow that conventional monetary policy cannot adequately deal with the threat of deflation by expeditiously mopping up after the bubble collapses.
In Japan, deflation could probably have been avoided if the initial monetary response to the slump in real estate and stock market values had been more aggressive; in addition, macroeconomic performance would have been better if the government had dealt more promptly with the structural problems of the banking sector.6 As for the Great Depression, the Federal Reserve actually worsened the situation by allowing the money supply to contract sharply in 1930 and 1931, after unwisely attempting to prick the stock market bubble in the first place.
Rather than demonstrating the need for preemptive extra action to restrain emerging bubbles, these examples are object lessons concerning the wisdom of central banks' easing promptly and aggressively following market slumps when inflation is already low, so as to head off the threat posed by the zero lower bound.
Proponents of extra action often argue that it should reduce the risk of hitting the zero bound, but we should recognize that under some circumstances extra action may actually exacerbate the problem.
To see this, suppose that a speculative bubble has emerged and that a central bank, operating under a conventional strategy, has raised interest rates to keep the projected output gap closed and expected inflation at its desired level before the bubble bursts.
In a low-inflation environment, such a step would be a bad idea if, after averaging across all the possible outcomes weighted by their likelihoods, the predicted moderation in the bubble from tighter policy is small.
In this case, the expected weakening in real activity after the bubble bursts would be only marginally less severe under extra action, but inflation would be substantially lower because the extra action policy would have generated persistent economic slack beforehand.
With inflation having already started out at a low level, such a decline would be extremely dangerous because the zero bound would now be much more likely to constrain monetary policy after the bubble bursts.
Under these conditions, extra action would therefore worsen expected economic performance, not improve it.
Another purported benefit of extra action is that, by raising the cost of capital to firms and households, it helps reduce overinvestment fostered during speculative booms, thereby making it easier for the economy to recover after the bubble collapses.
However, we should be careful not to exaggerate the macroeconomic importance of such capital mis-allocation.
high-tech boom led to overinvestment in some sectors, wasting resources and creating lingering difficulties while capital overhangs were eliminated.
But it is hard to see much of a cost in terms of diminished aggregate productivity, given the robust growth of output per hour over the past few years.
Furthermore, even if tighter monetary policy would have damped the enthusiasm for dot-com firms in the late 1990s, higher interest rates would have also led to less housing and less business investment outside the high-tech sector, where valuations were not obviously out of line with fundamentals.
Thus, mitigating capital misallocation in one sector would have created capital misallocations elsewhere, making the assessment of the net gain from extra action difficult.
And, as I have been pointing out, extra action would have idled some capital entirely for a time as economic activity fell short of its level consistent with stable inflation.
Now I would like to return to the first condition, the one I sidestepped a few minutes ago--the question of identifying market bubbles in a timely fashion.
The ECB article stressed that such identification is a tricky proposition because not all the fundamental factors driving asset prices are directly observable, as the productivity acceleration and stock market boom of the 1990s illustrate.
For this reason, any judgment by a central bank that stocks or homes are overpriced is inherently highly uncertain.
By acting to mitigate a nonexistent problem, the central bank reduces real economic activity and inflation below their desired levels to no purpose.
Admittedly, policymakers, once they recognize their mistake, would presumably want the economy to run hotter for a time to restore the previous rate of inflation and would thereby make up for the initial output losses.
But coming to the realization that the original assessment was mistaken and that asset prices were in line with fundamentals is likely to take some time.
Unfortunately, I suspect that this call would often come so late in the day that, given the lags in the monetary transmission mechanism and uncertainty about the duration of bubbles, raising interest rates might actually risk exacerbating instability.
The market correction could occur with policy in a tighter position but before extra action had enough time to materially influence speculative activity.
Notwithstanding the controversial aspects of identifying bubbles, policymakers may still want to warn the public about the possibility of asset price misalignments when the evidence merits.
And talk by itself should not do much lasting harm even if valuations turn out to be justified--provided, however, that words are not seen as precursors to action under circumstances in which conventional policy would still be the best approach.
To wrap up this critique, I summarize as follows: If we can identify bubbles quickly and accurately, are reasonably confident that tighter policy would materially check their expansion, and believe that severe market corrections have significant non-linear adverse effects on the economy, then extra action may well be merited.
For my part, I am dubious that any central banker knows enough about the economy to overcome these hurdles.
However, I would not want to rule out the possibility that in some circumstances, or perhaps at some point in the future when our understanding of asset markets and the economy has increased, such a course of action would be appropriate.
Proponents of extra action have their own bones to pick with the conventional strategy, especially as it relates to the alleged asymmetric nature of the policy's response to asset market booms and busts.
In particular, the claim is often made that, based on the FOMC's actions over the past twenty years, the Fed actively works to support the economy in an event of a sharp decline in asset markets but does little or nothing to restrain markets when prices are rising, thereby creating moral hazard problems.
monetary policy has responded symmetrically to the implications of asset-price movements for actual and projected developments in output and inflation, consistent with its mandate.
The most convincing evidence for this statement can be found in the results: Interest rates have been consistent with underlying inflation remaining reasonably stable for some time now, accompanied by relatively mild fluctuations in real activity.7
Conventional policy as practiced by the Federal Reserve has not insulated investors from downside risk.
Whatever might have once been thought about the existence of a "Greenspan put," stock market investors could not have endured the experience of the last five years in the United States and concluded that they were hedged on the downside by asymmetric monetary policy.
Nor, for that matter, should they have concluded that the Federal Reserve does not act on the upside: If asset prices had been more closely aligned with fundamentals in the late 1990s, our policy would almost certainly have been easier, all else equal, because aggregate demand would have been weaker and hence inflation pressures even more muted than they were.
The same considerations apply to homeowners: All else being equal, interest rates are higher now than they would be were real estate valuations less lofty; and if real estate prices begin to erode, homeowners should not expect to see all the gains of recent years preserved by monetary policy actions.
Our actions will continue to be keyed to macroeconomic stability, not the stability of asset prices themselves.
Ironically, one can argue that extra action may pose a more significant risk of moral hazard.
It is one thing for policymakers to raise questions about the relationship of asset prices to fundamentals and another for a central bank to take action to influence valuations in the direction of some "appropriate" level.
How does this strategy play out if a central bank takes extra action and speculative activity continues unabated or even intensifies? Do policymakers raise rates even further above levels consistent with conventional policy and, if so, at what consequences for the economy? And what is the risk that, in taking such steps, a central bank would be seen by investors as taking on partial responsibility for asset prices? If so, would the pressure on central banks to support asset prices in market downturns increase?
Otmar, you have taught me much about intellectual rigor in support of central bank contributions to economic welfare--and about friendship.
Weighing the relative merits of extra action and conventional policy is not easy and requires a nuanced interpretation of the arguments and the evidence, as well as some hard thinking.
David Reifschneider, of the Federal Reserve Board's staff, contributed substantially to the preparation of these remarks.
European Central Bank (2005), "Asset Price Bubbles and Monetary Policy" (1.7 MB PDF), Monthly Bulletin (April), p.
The article's label for this strategy--leaning against the wind--has been used for many years to describe the standard behavior of central banks.
From a theoretical standpoint, the "rational bubble" literature demonstrates how a rise in interest rates might lead rational agents to boost the growth rate of asset prices during a speculative episode.
Recently, ECB staff economists Carsten Detken and Frank Smets have taken a laudable first step at addressing this issue in a paper that establishes some of the basic empirical facts about the correlations among interest rates, money, credit, asset prices, financial distress, and macroeconomic performance.
See Carsten Detken and Frank Smets (2004) "Asset Price Booms and Monetary Policy" (882 KB PDF), European Central Bank Working Paper Series 364, (Frankfurt: ECB, May).
Kamin (2002), "Preventing Deflation: Lessons from Japan's Experience in the 1990s," International Finance Discussion Paper Series 2002-729 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, June).
Borio and Philip Lowe (2004), "Securing Sustainable Price Stability: Should Credit Come Back from the Wilderness?" Bank of International Settlements Working Paper 157 (Basel: BIS, July).
The authors purport to show that the federal funds rate was unusually low during the headwinds period of the early 1990s but not correspondingly high before the onset of the 1990 recession.
But their assessment is made in relation to the Taylor rule, which is not a particularly good description of monetary policy during this period of opportunistic disinflation.
In the event, inflation in the United States came down steadily over the first half of the 1990s, accompanied by significant economic slack--results that seem to belie the claim that policy was overly easy.

At the Annual Washington Conference of the Institute of International Bankers, Washington, D.C.
Over the past twenty years, I have attended many of these Institute of International Bankers (IIB) spring conferences in Washington, D.C., either as a speaker or a participant.
The consistently larger number of attendees at a meeting here in Washington, as opposed to a meeting in one of the more dynamic international financial centers like New York or Los Angeles, reflects this group's clear recognition that public policy has a direct impact on the viability of your respective institutions.
Appropriately, most of the topics presented over these two days cover legislative and regulatory issues intermixed with critical strategic issues.
For my presentation, I will revisit a topic initially raised twenty-four years ago by a former president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, E.
In 1982, Jerry Corrigan, then the president of the Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank, wrote an essay entitled "Are Banks Special?" for the Bank's annual report.
Today I would like to revisit the issue and ponder the question "Are Banks Still Special?"
I realize that some of you may be wondering why a focus on the specialness of the domestic U.S.
banking industry would be an appropriate topic at a meeting of foreign bank representatives.
laws and regulations for foreign banks adhere to the fundamental principle of national treatment.
That is, our regulations allow foreign banks to have the same range of product authority as domestic banks.
Therefore, any change in policy that affects domestic banks will also potentially affect the range of products foreign banks may offer.
Another reason why the issue is likely to be of interest to this audience is that, in any discussion of product authority or regulatory structure, the experiences of other nations are often used as examples.
Within a period of a few months in the mid-1930s, Congress (1) required the separation of banking from many securities functions by passing the Glass-Steagall Act, (2) provided protection for bank depositors by passing the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, and (3) authorized the creation of a dedicated home mortgage lender by passing the Home Owners' Loan Act.
This delineation extended to the marketplace for the banking and securities industries.
During this period, there were few issues of controversy between banks and securities firms, the most notable exception being the narrowly focused but heated disagreement as to whether banks should be allowed to underwrite revenue bonds.
The Glass-Steagall Act specifically authorized banks to underwrite general obligation bonds, but the act was silent on the issue of revenue bonds.
The banking industry viewed that as an oversight; the securities industry viewed it as a purposeful exclusion.
In contrast to the relative peace between banks and securities firms, the competition for deposits between banks and thrifts was quite strong and intensified with the imposition of Regulation Q.
Not only did Regulation Q establish ceilings on interest rates for both passbook savings accounts and certificates of deposit (CDs), the regulation gave thrifts an interest rate advantage of initially 50, then 25, basis points for each of their interest-bearing products.
The intense marketplace competition between banks and thrifts was matched by the level of competition in the halls of Congress.
Bankers aggressively worked to eliminate that quarter-point rate differential, while thrifts worked equally hard to preserve it.
Such widespread competition was nonexistent between the securities and banking industries.
Savings dollars were held in passbook accounts or CDs, and were insured up to certain limits by Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) or Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC) insurance.
Banks and thrifts waged a turf war against each other, but neither industry aimed its marketing guns or lobbying efforts at the securities industry.
Then along came money market mutual funds, or money funds.
High interest rates during the late 1970s and early 1980s had a stunning effect on the flow of deposits into banks and thrifts.
Money fund shares issued by investment firms offered market interest rates and a high level of liquidity, through either immediate withdrawal or the ability to effect transactions by using payable-through drafts.
By contrast, Regulation Q mandated low interest rates on passbook accounts, specific term restrictions on CDs, and significant penalties for early withdrawal.
The banking industry had no products to counter the market appeal.
After a tepid and wholly unsuccessful effort by bankers to restrict the growth of money funds, the banking industry began considering a different response.
Now that the securities industry had successfully breached the separation between banking and savings by allowing consumers to invest in money funds, the banking industry was forced to examine its fundamental marketplace role.
At meetings held between 1980 and 1982, as many as 400 bankers representing institutions of all sizes and markets gathered to consider an industry response.
Congress's response to the growth of money funds was to pass the Monetary Control Act of 1980 and the Garn-St Germain Act of 1982.
Taken together, these laws, along with other provisions, eliminated many of the rate and term restrictions on banks' and thrifts' deposit taking and allowed both types of institutions to offer products that could match the rate and liquidity provisions of money funds.
But it was clear to many bankers that a lasting response to marketplace changes would require more than just the removal of Regulation Q.
That is, "they incurred liabilities payable on demand at par and are readily transferable by the owner to third parties." That transaction account authority helped "to insure that financial disruptions do not spread." Backed also by deposit insurance and access to the discount window, banks "reinforced public confidence that is essential to a healthy economy."
-Corrigan's second criterion identified banks as critical backup sources of liquidity.
In fact his essay stated that "banks are the primary source of liquidity for all other classes and sizes of institutions, both financial and nonfinancial."
-The third characteristic Corrigan identified is that banks "are the transmission belt for monetary policy.
That role combined with operating the payments mechanism permit the highly efficient financial markets to function and effect the orderly end of day settlement."
The Federal Deposit Insurance Act defined "bank" differently than the Bank Holding Company Act did, a distinction that allowed commercial entities to own FDIC-insured banks by narrowing their product offerings to meet the BHC Act test.
(The Competitive Equality Banking Act reconciled these definitions in 1987.) If banks are special, Corrigan stated, limitations on what services and lines of business banks could offer were justified.
Further, the services of businesses that are allowed to be owners of banks should reflect in a nearly symmetric way, the services banks are allowed to offer.
Between the publication of Corrigan's essay and passage of the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, market forces, supported by either regulatory interpretation or court challenges, continued to blur the lines between the banking, securities, and insurance industries.
As capital markets expanded, mutual funds put pressure on bank deposits.
In Europe, foreign bank successes in securities activities suggested that banks conduct these activities in a safe and sound manner.
But until 1999, there was no legislative response to these basic marketplace changes or to the broader question of the separation of banking and commerce.
At the time of Corrigan's essay--the early 1980s--the statutory authority for that separation was largely contained in two laws: the Glass-Steagall Act, which separated commercial banking from certain investment and securities activities, and the Bank Holding Company Act (with amendments), which narrowly limited the activities of corporations that were allowed to own banks.
When it passed in 1956, the Bank Holding Company Act was thought to have been in response to one company's aggressive expansion into banking activities.
Therefore, the ensuing body of law on the commerce and banking issue concentrated significantly on separating, or was inspired by desire to separate, banking from securities or banking from insurance.
From the time of Corrigan's essay until passage of Gramm-Leach-Bliley, the banking industry had expanded substantially into both the securities and insurance agency fields, though significant restrictions still remained.
Much of the industry's expanded securities authority was gained through the Federal Reserve's approval of securities underwriting for banks, under Section 20 of the Glass-Steagall Act.
Under the Federal Reserve's rule, a bank subsidiary was "not engaged principally" in securities underwriting if at first 5 percent, then 10 percent, and ultimately 25 percent of its revenue came from underwriting.
This expanded authority allowed many banking organizations, though almost exclusively large banks, to significantly expand their domestic securities activities.
These same powers were extended to foreign banks operating in the United States.
Court determinations also expanded national banks' ability to market insurance products.
Consequently, banks of all sizes have expanded their involvement in insurance and annuity activities.
By 1999, banks and bank holding companies had gained significant additional product authority in securities and insurance, areas that had been perceived to be on the other side of the banking and commerce wall at the time Corrigan wrote his essay.
A number of factors persuaded Congress that federal action was appropriate, and the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act was passed.
Congress had learned from the securities and insurance experiences of foreign banks, both the high points and the low points.
On the one hand, institutions in some European countries had successfully broadened their securities and insurance activities.
On the other hand, there were lingering questions about whether some Pacific rim banks were too closely linked to certain commercial enterprises in the region, thus facilitating the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s.
In addition, the improved analytical capacity offered by new technology, better coordination among domestic and international bank supervisors, a healthy track record for U.S.
banks, and the growth of consolidated home-country supervision across the world helped U.S.
banks and their affiliates to further expand their commercial activities.
First, it moved the separation wall between banking and commerce to reflect what had already occurred in the marketplace: Gramm-Leach-Bliley also addressed the broader question of what types of businesses could own or affiliate with banks by allowing companies to own banking, securities, and insurance entities within a structure known as a financial holding company.
Second, Congress provided a way for banks to gain new-product authority when the new products were determined to be financial in nature, incidental to banking, or complimentary to existing banking authority.
Third, by clearly separating the federally insured entity--either banks or thrifts--from the newer and potentially higher-risk new-product authorities, Gramm-Leach-Bliley reaffirmed as a matter of public policy that banks continue to be regarded as special.
But the act offers a clear acknowledgment that the separation of banking and commerce is not a bright line but is instead a negotiated compromise--one that will continue to move as markets change and products are refined.
The guiding consideration in this compromise will be the protection of the federal deposit insurance fund.
Significant increases in international capital flows among bank and nonbank entities, in addition to a broad range of specialized financial instruments mean banks can no longer be considered the only source of transaction accounts.
Except for their access to the Federal Reserve discount window, banks are no longer the dominant provider of liquidity for other financial industries.
But banks remain the key access point to the dominant wholesale payments network, and they still provide federally insured checking and savings deposits.
With the rise of new financial services, products, and techniques, moreover, banks have expanded their role in providing liquidity in more indirect ways, for example, through securitization of loans and backup commitments to securitization vehicles and other capital-markets instruments.
Even when banks may not be "special" or unique providers in a particular market, banks have proven themselves to be formidable competitors and innovators--which only reinforces banks' importance in the proper functioning of our financial system.
In short, the public's trust and confidence in banking continue to be vital to our financial well-being.
Banks provided considerable credit in the aftermath of the September 11 attacks, when financial flows were slowed by operational problems.
To be sure, banks were able to provide this credit in part because of the huge injection of liquidity provided by the Federal Reserve.
But that is a key role for banks in a crisis: to obtain funds--through the discount window or from open market operations, if necessary--and to channel them to those needing funds, based on an assessment of their creditworthiness.
During a crisis, those banks that play critical roles in the payments system are especially important.
As a result, these banks are expected to be very resilient.
Though banks now have a smaller role in transmitting monetary policy, they still help to transmit policy actions by arbitraging between the federal funds market and other money markets.
A strong case can be made that banks continue to be special.
And because they are special, we, as regulators, will continue to apply high standards to companies seeking a bank charter.
We must also continue to examine and supervise banks for safety and soundness.
Likewise, it appears that Congress will take a cautious approach when determining what types of companies may own and affiliate with banks.
Consequently, we can expect over time to see adjustments in both the direct activities of banks and in the line separating banking and commerce.
As a matter of public policy, changes will trail rather than lead the marketplace, and any changes must be informed by a careful study of both the role we want banks to play in our economy and the needs of the marketplace.

To the Financial Stability Forum, International Accounting Standards Board, and International Federation of Accountants Roundtable on Financial Reporting and Auditing, Paris, France (via videoconference on February 16)
As chairman of the Financial Stability Forum, I would like to express my appreciation to all of you that are participating in this roundtable as distinguished speakers or in other roles.
In addition, I appreciate the very good partnership that we have had with the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB) and International Federation of Accountants (IFAC)), and with our host, the World Bank, in preparing for this gathering.
Since our last joint Roundtable in October 2004, much has transpired in the international accounting and auditing arenas.
Indeed, 2005 was a very big implementation year for international standards around the world.
The topics of this Roundtable--dealing with the experience of implementing IASB and IFAC standards and related regulatory challenges, international convergence and harmonization, issues associated with using fair values in the financial reporting model, and risks and vulnerabilities arising from the financial reporting chain--all reflect the interconnectedness of accounting, auditing, and regulation and the need to consider these issues from the unique perspectives that all of you bring to the table.
It is very important that this type of constructive dialogue continues to take place among the many key stakeholders in the financial reporting chain.
The focus of the roundtable--international financial reporting and auditing--continues to gain increased attention from members of the international regulatory community such as the Financial Stability Forum, the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO), the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), and the Basel Committee as well as from national supervisors, standards setters, banks, investors, analysts, auditors, and many others.
These challenging developments have led to a new resolve on the part of governmental, regulatory, and business leaders that there must be a reinforcement and improvement of standards-setting processes and a return to sound accounting, auditing, and disclosure practices by companies and their auditors.
The unprecedented problems of a few years ago fueled efforts to help restore investor confidence in U.S.
and European capital markets through legislative reforms affecting both the accounting profession and corporate management and directors.
For example, these efforts led to, for example, the enactment of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act in the United States which set the stage for a new audit oversight authority--the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board--to regulate, inspect, report on, and in some cases enforce penalties against auditors and led to new requirements for corporate management to maintain strong internal controls and to make periodic public reports on the adequacy of their companies' internal controls.
In the European Union, the Eighth Directive and other initiatives were undertaken in recognition of the important role of audit oversight authorities.
But long before these legislative initiatives were being considered, steps were taken to establish independent international standards-setting frameworks for both accounting and auditing standards, as reflected by the creation of the IASB in 2001 and the IFAC International Auditing and Assurance Standards Board (or IAASB).
Both of these standards-setting processes have been reviewed and enhanced over time and continue to be subject to improvements.
In his keynote speech earlier today, Michel Prada shared with you IOSCO's initiatives to address international accounting and auditing issues.
It is clear that IOSCO has played a very important role in these arenas for many years.
Likewise, central banks and banking supervisors have taken steps to enhance their focus on accounting and auditing matters that affect institutions they supervise.
During the mid-1990s, the Basel Committee started to devote more resources to developing principles that would help shape and improve bank disclosure, supervisory reporting, and accounting practices.
Moreover, the committee recognized that it was also important to support high-quality standards-setting processes.
This participation led to the development of enhanced accounting guidance on financial instruments and more comprehensive bank audit guidance.
The IAIS has also shown a strong interest in the development of sound international accounting and auditing standards, as evidenced by its participation in the IASB's Insurance Working Group and the recent Group of Thirty (G-30) effort to enhance the transparency of reinsurance activities.
All of these positive efforts by regulators and supervisors reflect a growing recognition that sound accounting policies and meaningful public disclosure by banking and other financial organizations and by nonbanking companies can improve market discipline.
With sufficient, accurate, and relevant information, market participants can better evaluate counterparty risks and adjust the availability and pricing of funds to promote better allocation of financial resources.
Thus, more-effective market discipline can, in a sense, "regulate" the risk-taking activities of banks and other firms in ways that can complement supervision and regulation of financial institutions and foster stable financial markets.
The concept of market discipline has assumed greater importance among international banking supervisors with the publication of the new International Capital Framework, called Basel II, which seeks to strengthen the market's ability to aid bank supervisors in regulating capital adequacy.
As you know, in addition to pillars on risk-based capital requirements (pillar 1) and risk-based supervision (pillar 2), Basel II includes the very important pillar 3, which addresses disclosure of risks and capital adequacy to enhance market discipline.
This approach to capital regulation, with its market-discipline component, signals that sound accounting and disclosure will continue to be important parts of the global bank supervisory approach for many years to come.
In addition to disclosure and market discipline, supervisors and regulators around the world recognize the need for stronger audit and control standards for financial services firms and other companies.
The quality of management information and supervisory and financial reporting is dramatically affected by internal control systems, including internal audit programs and reviews by external auditors.
Sound supervisory and financial reporting, good internal controls, and quality audits are becoming more important to financial services regulators because they directly affect regulators' ability to promptly identify institutions in distress and work toward a satisfactory resolution.
This shared understanding of the importance of sound audit and control practices led to an unprecedented level of cooperation among the international regulatory community--in this case, IOSCO, the Basel Committee, the IAIS, the European Commission (EC), the World Bank, and the Financial Stability Forum, which came to be known as the Monitoring Group.
This common position served as a basis for dialogue with the leadership of IFAC about establishing a credible independent oversight authority to help enhance the integrity and objectivity of the IAASB's international audit-standards-setting processes.
This led to the creation of the new Public Interest Oversight Board of IFAC, which is now busy assuming its new responsibilities.
The Public Interest Oversight Board (PIOB) should, over time, lead to enhanced audit standards and practices around the world.
The Financial Stability Forum is pleased to have been a strong supporter of this initiative, and I am happy to see that the PIOB is represented at this roundtable today together with the leaders of IFAC and many Monitoring Group representatives.
The Financial Stability Forum has taken a close interest in national and international efforts to strengthen confidence in financial reporting frameworks.
Stronger and more-convergent national systems bring clear financial stability and efficiency benefits.
The goal of global standards in both areas will require a high degree of convergence between U.S.
and international standards, and efforts toward full commonality are well underway.
The forum's interest reflects the strong recognition of its members that the potential financial stability and efficiency benefits are significant: high-quality global accounting standards can lead to enhanced transparency that will improve market discipline and foster stable financial markets.
Likewise, external audits performed in accordance with high-quality global audit standards can ensure that financial statements are reliable, transparent, and useful to the marketplace, thus enhancing market confidence.
Let me also stress the need to continue to implement approaches that not only improve international accounting and audit standards, but also encourage, through the implementation and enforcement of these standards, an enhancement in actual international accounting and audit practices.
However, like any professional undertaking, developing accounting and auditing standards and practices can be complicated, and gaining a shared understanding of the implications for the financial reporting chain and for financial stability can take time.
Therefore, I am pleased to see that the Financial Stability Forum, the IASB, and IFAC conducted this roundtable on important financial reporting and auditing matters and that you are taking the time to contribute to the exchange of valuable information on key issues.
I hope that this roundtable will continue to foster constructive dialogue among the many key stakeholders represented here and that this type of dialogue will continue after the roundtable has ended.

At the Independent Community Bankers of America National Convention and Techworld, Las Vegas, Nevada
I am pleased to join you today to discuss matters of mutual interest to the Federal Reserve and community banks; to learn more about your business; and, I hope, to meet many of you in person.
Community banks have long played a critical role in the U.S.
Today, I will begin by making some observations, based in part on research done at the Federal Reserve and elsewhere, about the health of community banks and their evolving role in our economy.
Community banks are generally doing quite well, and I expect that good performance to continue.
But community banks also face a changing business environment that presents a number of important long-run challenges.
In the second portion of my remarks, I will speak a bit about how the Federal Reserve, as the supervisor of many community banks, is also adjusting to a changing environment, and I will review some of the key financial risks facing community banks.
By a wide variety of indicators, the overall performance of community banks in recent years has been quite strong.
Average return on equity (ROE), for example, following a decline associated with the 2001 recession, remains solid and indeed has shown a slight upward trend.
Return on assets for community banks as a whole demonstrates a similar pattern and has stayed well above traditional benchmarks of strong performance.
Net interest margins remain higher than those of the largest banks, and this gap has even widened since 2003.
Various measures of loan quality for community banks have been robust, and bank failures have been rare.
Equally important, both our on-site examinations and our off-site surveillance system, which uses statistical models to attempt to flag emerging weaknesses at community banks, detect signs of potential problems at very few banks.
Consistent with this view, community bank capital ratios remain impressively high, and community banks' ability to attract deposits continues to be a source of strength.
One strong indicator of the continued health of community banks is the rate at which new banks continue to be created.
For example, if we define a community bank as any bank or thrift organization with total real (2002) assets of a billion dollars or less, slightly more than 700 community banks were formed from the beginning of 2000 through 2005, an average of about 120 per year.
Clearly, many people remain willing to invest in the future of community banking.
The Board has long taken the view that community banks will remain a vigorous and innovative sector of the economy.
But I am sure that many in this audience would agree that community banks also face serious challenges.
Expansion of the geographic scope of banking activities, rapid technological change in the production of financial services, the increasing importance of nonbank providers, and evolving patterns of economic growth are among the factors that are changing the banking marketplace.
And, while many of these changes have improved the efficiency of our financial system and lowered costs for consumers, it is only realistic to acknowledge that they also present new and sometimes daunting tests for community banks.
Indeed, we have seen major shifts in the structure of the U.S.
Under the same definition of community banks that I used a moment ago, the share of banking industry assets held in community banks has fallen from about 20 percent in 1994 to a little more than 12 percent in 2005.
In addition, the number of community banks has dropped from more than 10,000 in 1994 to about 7,200 in 2005.
Other definitions of community banks and other structural measures, such as the share of total deposits, also show declines in recent years.
A recent study by a member of the Federal Reserve Board staff shows that between 1994 and 2003 there were more than 3,500 bank and thrift mergers (Pilloff, 2004).
Although bank merger activity has generally declined since the late 1990s, at least 200 deals were completed in each year from 2000 through 2005.
These developments notwithstanding, research by our staff and other economists supports the view that community banks continue to play an important role in the provision of financial services, particularly to small businesses, but also to a wide range of retail customers nationwide.
Indeed, conventional wisdom in the research community is that "the central principle of community banking is 'relationship finance'" (DeYoung et al., 2004, p.
Relationship finance strengthens the economy by allowing credit and other financial services to be provided more efficiently.
But recent research also confirms what many community bankers tell us--that traditional notions of relationship finance are changing, along with the nature of community bank-customer relationships.
The conventional research paradigm included the idea that small businesses and households tend to be informationally "opaque"; that is, information about these potential borrowers can be costly to obtain and hard to quantify.
According to this view, the efficient supply of credit to such parties required close interactions to elicit "soft," or qualitative, information, such as the personal characteristics of the borrower or relevant aspects of local markets and opportunities.
This paradigm holds that large banks have a comparative advantage lending to those relatively transparent customers from which they can obtain "hard," or quantitative, information, such as standardized accounting data, and community banks have a comparative advantage lending to relatively opaque small businesses and households.
However, this division of labor between large and small institutions has begun to blur.
Technological and financial innovation, including credit scoring, securitization, and economies of scale in data processing, have combined to make credit card lending a hard-information, transactions-driven business, quite different from traditional unsecured personal lending, which relies heavily on personal knowledge and relationships.
Some recent data from the Board's forthcoming Survey of Small Business Finances sheds some light on how the marketplace, and the role of community banks, is changing.
Our most recent data, which are still preliminary and will be released later this year, are for year-end 2003; they are the result of interviews with more than 4,200 small businesses that represent an estimated 6.3 million small businesses in the United States.
For example, the proportion of these businesses using some type of financial service at a bank or thrift rose from 92 percent in 1998 to 96 percent in 2003.
Increases occurred across a broad range of financial services and were especially strong in the area of "financial management services," which includes activities such as check clearing, cash management, letters of credit, and credit card processing.
According to the surveys, community banks remain an important provider of these services, albeit in an increasingly competitive marketplace.
Among small businesses that reported using a bank or thrift in 2003, about 37 percent used a community bank, down from about 42 percent in 1998.
Although these surveys show that community banks face increasing competition, including from nondepository providers, they also highlight the importance of one of the traditional strengths of community banks: local presence.
For example, in 2003 the median distance between a small business's headquarters and its bank or thrift was three miles, about the same as in 1998.
Indeed, part of the success of nondepository institutions may have been due to the fact that the median distance between a small-business customer and its nondepository service provider fell from 83 miles in 1998 to 37 miles in 2003, with most of the change resulting from greater proximity of customers to nondepository loan providers.
Data collected as part of the banking agencies' Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) activities also demonstrate the importance of proximity.
From CRA and other data, we can estimate the share of loans to small businesses made by depository institutions located physically within the local market area.
However, in value terms, the share of small-business loans made by out-of-market firms did not exceed 18 percent in any year.
We see that, for community banks, the overall picture is complex.
In financial terms, community banks remain quite strong, and there is considerable entry into the business.
New technologies and management methods have eroded some of the traditional informational benefits of relationship finance, however, and community banks have lost market share to larger banks and to nondepository institutions.
In my view, the strong relationships and personalized services provided by community banks remain an important reason for their continuing success.
Like community banks, bank supervisors must also adapt to a changing financial and economic environment.
I would like to discuss some of the ways in which the Federal Reserve's supervision of community banks has evolved in recent years and also briefly review some of the key financial risks that we see in our examinations.
In the 1990s, bank supervisors began to take a more proactive, risk-focused approach.
In adapting to change, the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies have also consistently kept in view the competitive pressures that community banks face, pressures that make the costs of regulation an important concern.
For example, based on industry feedback and supervisory experience, the Federal Reserve recently modified its Small Bank Holding Company Policy Statement to raise the asset size used to define eligible companies from $150 million to $500 million.
These revisions address changes in the industry and in the economy since the initial issuance of the policy statement in 1980.
While the bank holding companies (BHCs) affected hold only 6 percent of total BHC assets, this change increases the exempt group to roughly 85 percent of all BHCs, thereby providing some burden relief to many smaller companies.
These companies will be exempt from consolidated risk-based capital guidelines and will be allowed to file abbreviated semiannual reports in place of consolidated quarterly financial statements.
Under the policy statement, the exemption would not be extended to holding companies with significant nonbank or off-balance-sheet activities or that have material amounts of public debt or equity securities outstanding.
Of course, we and the other banking agencies will vigorously enforce prudential capital standards for all deposit-taking institutions, including those owned by the exempt BHCs.
Supervisors have sought to adjust regulatory procedures to account for the needs of community banking organizations in other ways.
As you are no doubt aware, in tandem with the review of capital standards for the largest banks, known as Basel II, the federal banking agencies are taking a comprehensive look at additional possible changes to existing regulatory capital guidelines for banks that would not adopt the proposed Basel II revisions.
These possible changes to Basel I would seek to increase the risk sensitivity of the framework and to help mitigate any competitive inequities that could result from the implementation of Basel II.
The recent update to the CRA regulations provides another example in which regulators have taken into account the special features of community banks.
Last year, the Federal Reserve and other federal agencies issued final CRA rules that reduced compliance burden by creating a new category of intermediate small banks with assets between $250 million and $1 billion.
Banks in this new category now face reduced requirements for data collection and reporting, and they have become eligible for a two-pronged set of CRA tests--a streamlined lending test and a community development test--rather than the three-part CRA criteria that larger banks must meet.
These changes are intended to reduce the costs borne by smaller banks and to increase flexibility while still achieving the community development objectives of CRA.
To target examination resources and to limit the burden of on-site reviews, the Federal Reserve also has increasingly relied on automated off-site monitoring tools.
For example, since the late 1990s, the Federal Reserve has supervised many small bank holding companies using an off-site review program.
We support this program with a targeted monitoring system that seeks to identify parent company and nonbank issues that may adversely affect affiliated insured depository institutions.
This program enables us to limit on-site reviews to those bank holding companies with characteristics that could pose risks to insured depositories.
We also use statistical models to monitor the condition of state member banks and quickly address any issues that emerge between regularly scheduled on-site examinations.
Thanks in large part to such efforts, examiners today conduct more of their supervisory activities offsite, helping to reduce the burden that is associated with on-site examinations at institutions like yours.
Beyond these changes, the Federal Reserve is participating in an ongoing interagency review of banking regulations pursuant to the Economic Growth and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction Act, known as EGRPRA.
This review seeks to identify opportunities to streamline regulatory procedures and requirements when such changes would be consistent with maintaining bank safety and soundness.
The Board has also supported various legislative changes that would ease regulatory burden.
These include a recently proposed change that would permit supervisors to extend the time between on-site examinations to eighteen months for well-managed and well-capitalized banks with up to $500 million in assets.
This change would double the current size threshold and has the potential to allow roughly 1,200 more community institutions to qualify for the extended examination cycle.
In my remaining time, I would like to discuss some of the key financial and risk-management challenges that we have identified through our supervisory activities.
Banking has always been a business of taking and managing risks, but evolving market and economic conditions affect the types of opportunities available.
In recent years, community banks have become more focused on commercial real estate lending, leading to a significant shift in the balance sheet and risk profiles of growing numbers of banks.
The rapid growth in commercial real estate exposures relative to capital and assets raises the possibility that risk-management practices in community banks may not have kept pace with growing concentrations and may be due for upgrades in oversight, policies, information systems, and stress testing.
In response to these developments, the federal banking agencies have recently proposed guidance that would focus examiners' attention on those loans that are particularly vulnerable to adverse market conditions--that is, loans dependent primarily on the sale, lease, or refinancing of commercial property as the source of repayment.
I emphasize that, in proposing this guidance, supervisors are not aiming to discourage banks from making sound loans in commercial real estate or in any other loan category.
Rather, we are affirming the need for each bank to recognize the risks arising from concentration and to have in place appropriate risk-management practices and capital levels.
Adjusting to changes in the level of short-term interest rates can also pose challenges to community banks.
Thus far, the relative stability of community bank net interest margins suggests that they have done a good job of managing their interest rate risk exposure throughout the recent increase in market rates.
Importantly, most community banks have effectively controlled the maturity distributions of their assets and made significant improvements over the past decade to their management and measurement of interest rate risk.
Certainly, the procedures employed by community banks today are significantly more effective than those typically used as recently as a decade ago.
However, we continue to see a small number of institutions with concentrations in longer-term assets.
In these cases, our examiners encourage banks to gauge the risks of new yield-enhancing strategies over the intermediate and longer terms.
The unique funding structure of community banks supports their strong recent performance.
For the most part, community banks continue to fund themselves primarily with relatively low cost and stable "core" deposits.
However, a limited segment of community banks is increasing its reliance on wholesale sources of funding.
Greater reliance on these sources places a premium on appropriate measurement and management of liquidity risk.
Most community banks manage their liquidity risk positions well, but supervisory reviews suggest that some institutions have room for improvement.
With the banking system enjoying a period of relatively high liquidity, now is a good time for all companies to assess the adequacy of their processes for managing liquidity risk.
I emphasize that, on the whole, we do not have broad supervisory concerns with community banks.
But it is only prudent to reiterate the importance of sound risk management to the continued success of community banks.
In closing, I want to return to where I began.
In my judgment, well-managed and innovative community banks will continue to play a critical role in the U.S.
Community banks provide vital services for their customers and are key contributors to sustained economic growth, both locally and nationally.
Indeed, the performance of community banks over the past decade has been very impressive.
Doubtless the future will continue to require both of us to evaluate and respond to changes that are often complex and difficult to understand, much less to predict.
It has been my pleasure to be here today, and I look forward to working with you in the coming years to ensure the continued vitality of the U.S.
"Whither the Community Bank?" Journal of Financial Services Research, vol.
Bank Merger Activity in the United States, 1994-2003, Staff Study 176.
Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, May.

I appreciate the opportunity to speak to you today about the macroeconomic outlook for the U.S.
As always, the views that I will be expressing are my own and do not necessarily represent those of my colleagues at the Federal Reserve.
On the economic side, the storms destroyed residential and business capital along with critical infrastructure and also disrupted economic activity, particularly in the energy and petrochemicals industries and at ports on the Gulf Coast.
Both the aftermath of the storms and the influence of the higher energy prices are reflected in the slower growth of real (that is, inflation adjusted) gross domestic product in the fourth quarter of last year.
Even so, over the course of the year as a whole, real GDP rose a bit more than 3 percent, payroll employment increased significantly, labor productivity posted another solid advance, and the unemployment rate moved down further.
Moreover, much of the slowdown in growth last quarter reflected factors that are unlikely to persist.
First, as I mentioned, the hurricanes significantly damped economic activity in the Gulf Coast region and led to a sharp increase in energy-related imports.
Although the recovery of economic activity in the worst-affected areas will take a long time, many of the affected industries, including those in the energy sector, have made considerable progress toward returning their production to normal levels.
The unwinding of these factors should provide some support to growth of real activity in the near term.
Indeed, the most recent data suggest that economic activity in 2006 is off to a solid start.
Payroll employment expanded briskly in January--the latest month for which figures are available--on top of sizable gains over the preceding two months.
Although these increases contain some bounceback from the effects of the hurricanes, they also likely reflect underlying strength in labor demand--an impression that is corroborated by the recent low readings on initial claims for unemployment insurance.
Overall, the fundamentals appear sufficient to support continued economic expansion.
Underlying productivity growth remains strong, the financial positions of households and businesses remain conducive to spending, and, if we have no further run-up in oil prices, the drag on activity from higher energy prices should diminish over time.
Many emerging market economies also are doing well, with exports providing a significant boost to activity in these countries.
These developments should provide some ongoing support to the U.S.
The continued surge in energy prices was the dominant factor affecting inflation last year.
Rising energy prices contribute to consumer inflation in several ways--by boosting prices for gasoline and other energy goods; by raising the price of non-energy goods and services as firms pass on increased energy costs; and by putting upward pressure on expectations of future inflation.
Despite those pressures, core inflation has, as I mentioned, remained contained, a result likely attributable to a range of causes.
The decline in the economy's energy intensity is one of the factors that has restrained the pass-through of energy prices into core inflation in recent decades.
Businesses responded by designing and purchasing capital goods that were more energy efficient and by redesigning production processes in ways that used less energy.
One measure of these changes in energy intensity is the ratio of energy use to real GDP, which has fallen more than half since the mid-1970s.
Econometric evidence suggests, however, that the pass-through of energy prices to core inflation has dropped by more than would be implied by the decline in energy intensity.
In particular, we often look at forecasting equations for core inflation that include a term for the price of energy, weighted by a measure of energy intensity.
In the period since 1981, the evidence of pass-through of energy prices to core inflation is more limited.
Because the energy-price term in these models already controls for the decline in energy intensity, this result suggests that other factors also are restraining the pass-through of energy prices to core inflation.
Although many factors could have led to these results, a likely explanation is that inflation expectations have become better anchored.
In the 1970s, monetary policy unfortunately allowed large increases in energy prices to have a persistent effect on inflation, a policy that undercut the Fed's credibility and caused long-run inflation expectations to be more volatile.
Since that time, however, the Federal Reserve has been more aggressive in fighting all sources of inflationary pressures, including energy price changes.
This effort appears to have paid off not only in low and stable inflation but also in a reduction in the sensitivity of long-run inflation expectations to energy prices.
This same tendency can be seen in longer-horizon measures of inflation compensation derived from a comparison of yields on nominal Treasury securities and those on Treasury inflation-protected securities (TIPS), which are indexed to a measure of price change.
Specifically, for the period five to ten years ahead, the TIPS-based measure of inflation compensation has remained well anchored in recent quarters.
Moreover, econometric evidence suggests that since early 2004, energy prices have had only a modest effect on TIPS-based inflation compensation at relatively longer horizons.
Because inflation-indexed securities were not issued in the 1970s and early 1980s, we cannot know for sure how these recent effects differ from those that might have operated earlier, but I believe that the difference would be stark.
All told, increases in energy prices over the past couple of years probably added about 1/2 percentage point to core inflation in 2005, and the lagged pass-through of past increases in energy prices appears likely to add roughly the same amount this year, provided that energy prices do not rise significantly further.
Another development that has received considerable attention recently is the term structure of interest rates--the yield curve.
Typically, longer-term interest rates are higher than short-term rates, so a curve plotting yields would rise as maturity lengthens.
In addition, some academic research, along with recent market commentary, suggests that the shape of the yield curve is a strong predictor of future economic growth.
Moreover, yield curves can be flat or inverted either because short-term interest yields are relatively high or because long-term rates are relatively low.
In addition, the relationship between the yield curve and future economic growth may have weakened in recent decades because the decline in inflation, the dropoff in the variance of economic growth since the mid-1980s, and financial innovation may have altered the sensitivity of households and businesses to changes in rates.
Indeed, in simple regression models estimated with recent data, a change in the slope of the term structure has a smaller effect on economic growth than when the models are estimated with data taken from a longer sample period.
And models using the more recent data anticipate more rapid real GDP growth in coming quarters than do models using the longer sample period.
The relationship between the yield curve and future growth also appears to depend on the factors that are keeping long-term rates low.
Long-term interest rates embody both expectations of future interest rates as well as the amount of compensation demanded by investors for the risk of unanticipated movements in real interest rates and inflation--that is, the term premium.
A flat yield curve resulting from low term premiums should have quite different implications for future growth than would a flat yield curve resulting from tight monetary policy.
To account for these developments, an estimate of the term premium can be added to a simple regression model of the relationship between real GDP growth and the slope of the yield curve.
Forecasts of future real GDP growth from this extended model are higher than those from models that include only the slope of the yield curve.
Thus, we have reasons to believe that the current configuration of the term structure is not signaling an economic downturn.
At the same time, the amount of economic stimulus arising from low long-term rates is probably not especially large.
Indeed, low long-term rates may be signaling relatively low demand for capital around the world relative to saving, which in turn may reflect a lack of sufficiently attractive investment opportunities.
For example, in the United States, the nominal share of business fixed investment in GDP has risen recently only to about its long-run average--a level arguably somewhat lower than might be expected given the low level of long-term interest rates.
Because interest rates equilibrate the supply and demand of capital, an excess of desired saving relative to desired investment would tend, all else equal, to hold down long-term rates.
By my reading, the incoming data suggest that the housing market has begun to cool somewhat, but they do not point to a sharper falloff.
House prices have increased at a remarkable rate during the past several years, and for some fundamentally sound reasons, including low mortgage rates.
The primary channel through which a deceleration or downturn in housing prices would be likely to affect the economy is the so-called wealth effect.
That is, the path of house prices directly affects the value of housing wealth, and changes in wealth influence households' consumption and saving.
Estimates from the Federal Reserve Board staff's large econometric model and from various consumption equations suggest that wealth effects are somewhere in the neighborhood of 3-1/2 cents on consumption for every dollar of change in wealth, with roughly half the effect realized within a year.
Moreover, these estimates are obtained from equations that look at changes in total wealth, whereas historically, much of the variation in wealth has reflected movements in equity prices.
Although efforts have been made to isolate the effects of changes in different types of wealth, it is difficult to get precise estimates of wealth effects specifically for real estate.
Another possible avenue for gauging the effects of housing prices on the economy is to look at experiences in other countries.
House prices have risen markedly in recent years in many industrial countries amid low long-term interest rates, ample liquidity, and steady economic growth.
During this period, residential investment contracted, and the growth of real consumption slowed a bit; but the economy continued to grow, in part because investment in other sectors picked up in response to strong global demand.
For example, in the Netherlands--where residential property prices rose particularly rapidly in the late 1990s--the rate of increase slowed significantly beginning in 2000.
In 2002 and 2003, the economy experienced a mild recession, with domestic demand contracting as a result of declines in investment (including residential investment) and contracting consumption.
But, even so, the economy started to recover in 2004 and 2005, and house prices there have continued to rise in recent years.
In the United Kingdom, house prices also flattened out last year, and this deceleration was accompanied by a slowdown in real consumption growth.
More recently, house prices have started rising again, and consumption growth has also picked up.
The experiences in Australia and the United Kingdom could be taken as suggesting that adjustments in house prices can be associated, on balance, with continued modest economic growth, while the Dutch experience paints a slightly more pessimistic picture.
Having said that, one difficulty in interpreting the foreign evidence is that gauging the direction of causality is difficult--that is, are adjustments in house prices causing a slowdown in real economic growth or is a slowdown in activity causing the adjustment in house prices.
On this point, a recent Federal Reserve study of international experience documented the pro-cyclicality of real house prices: House prices have tended to reach a maximum near business cycle peaks, with real GDP growth slowing during the first year or so after house prices peak.1
Given the limits of what we know about the future path of housing prices and about the implications of any particular house-price scenario for real activity, the Federal Reserve will have to continue monitoring this area closely.
Further increases in energy prices are another risk to the economic outlook.
Since the storms hit, prices have fluctuated widely in response to developments in both domestic and foreign oil markets and recently stood a bit below pre-Katrina levels.
Economic theory suggests that energy price hikes of this magnitude should have an important contractionary effect on the economy by reducing the purchasing power of households and holding down business profits outside the energy sector.
Persistently higher oil prices also likely reduce labor productivity and potential output over time as firms adjust their production processes to use less energy.
As for the reduction in aggregate demand, higher energy prices increase the bill for imported oil and natural gas, which can be viewed as a "tax" on U.S.
residents by foreign energy producers, thereby holding down aggregate demand.
Although they are imprecise, simulations from the Federal Reserve Board staff's large-scale econometric model, which account for these effects, suggest that increases in spot and futures prices of energy from late 2003 to the present subtracted a 1/2 percentage point from real GDP growth in 2004 and more than 1 percentage point in 2005.
In addition to their effect on economic activity, further increases in energy prices also pose a risk to the inflation outlook.
However, given strong global demand for energy resources and the ever-present risk of supply disruptions, additional increases in energy prices cannot be ruled out.
Such increases would boost the overall inflation rate and might put additional upward pressure on production costs and inflation expectations, which in turn, could create forces that would tend to push core inflation up.
If that were to occur, the Fed would need to be particularly vigilant to ensure that inflation remained under control.
As you know, the Federal Reserve seeks to foster price stability and to promote sustainable growth in output, and the members of the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) are committed to achieving these objectives.
Translating these general economic objectives into operational decisions about monetary policy poses many challenges, and no simple toolkit of economic and financial indicators or economic models can provide reliable guidance at all times.
In the current situation, the economic expansion appears to be on track and core inflation has remained moderate.
As I indicated, significant risks, if realized, could alter this generally sanguine outlook, and the Federal Reserve will continue to monitor developments closely.
Given the considerable uncertainties facing the economy and the outlook for policy, policy decisions in coming months will depend heavily on the implications of incoming economic data for future growth and inflation.
Martin (2005), "House Prices and Monetary Policy: A Cross-Country Study," International Finance Discussion Papers 2005-841 (Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, September).

In that regard, I would like to focus my talk today on education--its importance and its ongoing role in economic achievement.
Investment in human capital--as we economists like to call it--is critical to generating products and services with high economic value.
In short, an educated workforce is a must if our economy is to continue to enjoy significant gains in productivity and living standards.
At the same time, the link between education and individual economic success is well documented.
For African Americans, a college degree can substantially narrow the longstanding gap between their labor market experiences and those of whites.
Last year, for example, when the national unemployment rate averaged 5.1 percent, the jobless rate for black adults (25 years and older) with a bachelor's degree or higher was 3.5 percent; for white adults, the jobless rate was 2 percent.
For persons with only a high school diploma, both the rates of joblessness and the disparity between the rate for blacks and that for whites were greater: an unemployment rate of 8.5 percent for blacks versus 4 percent for whites.
Perhaps more indicative of the economic value of education, workers with college degrees earn an education premium, and that premium has risen over the past twenty-five years.
But the improvements slowed over the 1990s, and in 2004 it remained, at close to 89 percent, short of the rate for non-Hispanic white youth, which was just over 93 percent.2
One important factor in the uptrend in high-school completion has been a corresponding downtrend in the high-school dropout rate for African Americans.
In 2003, 6.3 percent of black students in grades 10 to 12 left school during the year--down from the over-the-year dropout rate of 9.7 percent in 1981 but little changed from the rate in 1991.3 For white high schoolers, the dropout rate between 2000 and 2001 was 4.1 percent.
Economists have identified a number of reasons for the racial gap in dropout rates, including lower expected returns to education because of discrimination in the job market and the lower quality of schools attended by blacks.
Clearly, raising the quality of our elementary and secondary schools is a longstanding goal, and the potential economic and social payoffs seem likely to be high.
In recent years, a number of economists, including staff members of the Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, have argued that intensive pre-school programs can help to build important noncognitive skills, such as persistence and motivation and, as a result, have large private and public net benefits.5
Our goal must be to see that our investments in motivating and educating students in our homes and in the elementary and secondary schools provide the students with the ability to pursue the advanced education and training that today's labor market values so highly.
Researchers offer several potential explanations for the difference in college graduation rates by race.
Research has shown that blacks have a higher rate of college attendance than whites and a similar rate of college completion when the comparison is made across individuals with similar educational achievement in high school.10 This finding provides yet another reason for greater investment in the quality of secondary schools.
As I noted earlier, the linkage between education and economic opportunity is typically measured by the relationship between education and earnings.
Earnings are an important measure of one's success in the labor market, but broader measures of income and ultimately net worth are even more significant yardsticks for gauging the financial health of households.
The Federal Reserve's Survey of Consumer Finances, which collects data every three years on the balance sheets of American families, provides comprehensive information on household income, assets, and liabilities.11 Data from the most recent survey show that, from 2001 to 2004, real (that is, inflation-adjusted) family income was little changed for both African American and non-Hispanic white households.
The 2004 results show that economic progress for blacks, as measured by real net worth, has been substantial over the fifteen years that the surveys have been conducted.
Although the racial wealth gap is significant at the top of the wealth distribution, a more important difference is that a much greater proportion of African-American families than whites have zero or near-zero real net worth.
Because none of these types of assets is owned by a large share of black families, any wealth gains arising from them will not be widely distributed across black families.
As is the case regardless of race, the home is typically a family's largest and most important asset.
For these and other reasons, increasing the rate of homeownership has been a longstanding national priority.
Of course, because we are interested not simply in homeownership or the value of homes but in net worth, an important consideration in terms of wealth creation is the amount of equity that families have in their homes--that is the difference between the value of the home and any debt secured by it.
Business ownership, too, remains an important avenue of wealth creation for African Americans.
The median net worth of black families with business assets was about $174,000 in 2004, a level more than eight times the median net worth for all black families.
All told, the findings from our most recent survey, along with the other trends that I discussed earlier, highlight noticeable gains in the economic well-being of African Americans.
To borrow a phrase from Juan Williams, those very special institutions have for decades had as their central mission helping African Americans "find a way or make one."12 And, even though black enrollment at other colleges and universities has risen over time, HBCUs continue to account for more than one-fifth of all bachelor's degrees awarded to African Americans.13 Among those schools and their graduates are many with a longstanding commitment to scientific and technical education, dating from George Washington Carver's tenure at Tuskegee to Julian Earls' work at NASA.
Although most of my remarks today have centered on the economic value of education, I want to emphasize that a good education is much more that just the classroom-based learning of facts, or even the skill of critical thinking.
In striving to encourage our students to do "well," we must not forsake our responsibility to give them a solid grounding in those topics that will help them do "good." You may be surprised to hear that even the economics profession--well-known for its hard-headed assumption of rational actors pursuing their own self interest--has in the past few decades focused on the role of moral and cooperative behaviors in leading to better economic outcomes.
Let me close by saying that the economy of the United States depends greatly on an educated workforce--one with the skills to tackle new ideas and new technologies, one in which morals and ethics are deeply instilled, and one with a love of learning, exploring, and questioning that lasts a lifetime.
 Robert Topel, "The Private and Social Values of Education (891 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland Conference on Education and Economic Development, November 19, 2004.
Snyder, Trends in the Well-Being of American Youth (592 KB PDF), U.S.
Chapman, Dropout Rates in the United States: 2001 (369 KB PDF), U.S.
Heckman and Pedro Carneiro, "Human Capital Policy," in James J.
Krueger, eds., Inequality in America: What Role for Human Capital Policies? (The MIT Press, 2003), and Rob Grunewald and Arthur Rolnick, "A Proposal for Achieving High Returns on Early Childhood Development," Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, May 2005.
 Yolanda Kodrzycki, "College Completion Gaps between Blacks and Whites: What Accounts for the Regional Differences," New England Economic Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, First Quarter 2004.
 Refer to, for example, Thomas Kane, "College Entry by Blacks Since 1970: The Role of College Costs, Family Background, and the Returns to Education," Journal of Political Economy, October 1994; J.
Heckman, "Can Tuition Policy Combat Rising Wage Inequality," in Marvin Kosters (ed.), Financing College Education: Government Policies and Educational Priorities (American Enterprise Institute, 1999).
Family Finances: Evidence from the 2001 and 2004 Survey of Consumer Finances (444 KB PDF)," Federal Reserve Bulletin, February 2006.
Snyder, Historically Black Colleges and Universities, 1976 to 2001, U.S.

At The Center for Economic Policy Studies and on the occasion of the Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
It is a great pleasure for me to return to Princeton today, to see so many friends and former colleagues, and to help celebrate the seventy-fifth anniversary of the founding of the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs.
I do not presume to draw any comparisons between myself and the nation's twenty-eighth President, of course; but besides the Princeton affiliation, we have in common a connection with the Federal Reserve System.
President Wilson made the establishment of the Federal Reserve one of his early legislative priorities, signing the Federal Reserve Act into law in December 1913, less than a year after taking office.
Wilson helped to negotiate the complex political compromises that finally gave the nation a permanent central bank, following two earlier failed attempts.
To simplify a complex history, earlier attempts to stabilize the monetary arrangements of the United States had frequently been roiled by perceived conflicts of interest between (on the one hand) the farmers and tradespeople of Main Street America, who believed that they were most advantaged by policies of easy credit, and (on the other hand) the financial barons of Wall Street, who, as creditors and bondholders, preferred "hard-money," low-inflation policies.
Recognizing that all parties would be served by a central bank that could help contain the periodic financial crises that afflicted the U.S.
economy, Wilson worked with the Congress to develop a structure for the central bank that finely balanced competing interests and concerns.
In particular, the Federal Reserve was given a regional structure, with twelve Reserve Banks that were distributed around the country and were empowered to represent sectional interests and to respond to local conditions.
Although Wilson understood the political and practical advantages of decentralization, he also resisted some powerful proponents of a completely decentralized system by supporting the creation of a Board of Governors in Washington to oversee and coordinate the activities of the regional Reserve Banks.
The mandate of the Federal Reserve System has changed since the institution opened its doors in 1914.
When the System was founded, its principal legal purpose was to provide "an elastic currency," by which was meant a supply of credit that could fluctuate as needed to meet seasonal and other changes in credit demand.
In this regard, the Federal Reserve was an immediate success.
The seasonal fluctuations that had characterized short-term interest rates before the founding of the Fed were almost immediately eliminated, removing a source of stress from the banking system and the economy.1 The Federal Reserve today retains important responsibilities for banking and financial stability, but its formal policy objectives have become much broader.
Its current mandate, set formally in law in 1977 and reaffirmed in 2000, requires the Federal Reserve to pursue three objectives through its conduct of monetary policy: maximum employment, stable prices, and moderate long-term interest rates.
One of my goals today is to consider the relationships among the three apparently disparate objectives of monetary policy.
In particular, I will argue for what I believe has become the consensus view, that the mandated goals of price stability and maximum employment are almost entirely complementary.
Central bankers, economists, and other knowledgeable observers around the world agree that price stability both contributes importantly to the economy's growth and employment prospects in the longer term and moderates the variability of output and employment in the short to medium term.
Notably, during the 1960s and early 1970s, some policymakers appeared to believe that price stability and high employment were substitutes, not complements.
Specifically, some influential voices of the time argued that, by accepting higher inflation, policymakers could bring about a permanently lower rate of unemployment.2 As I will discuss a bit later, the demise of the view that higher inflation promotes employment in favor of the modern consensus that low inflation and strong employment are complementary goals resulted from the constructive interplay between academic research and practical policymaking experience, an interplay that significantly improved policy outcomes and economic welfare in the United States.
Price stability plays a dual role in modern central banking: It is both an end and a means of monetary policy.
As one of the Fed's mandated objectives, price stability itself is an end, or goal, of policy.
Fundamentally, price stability preserves the integrity and purchasing power of the nation's money.
When prices are stable, people can hold money for transactions and other purposes without having to worry that inflation will eat away at the real value of their money balances.
As economist Martin Feldstein has frequently pointed out, price stability also permits tax laws, accounting rules, and the like to be expressed in dollar terms without being subject to distortions arising from fluctuations in the value of money.3 Economists like to argue that money belongs in the same class as the wheel and the inclined plane among ancient inventions of great social utility.
Price stability allows that invention to work with minimal friction.
In principle, the problem of inflation could be reduced by the practice of indexing dollar payments such as interest and wages to the price level, but people seem to find indexing costly and avoid it when they can.
It is interesting and instructive, for example, that the indexation of wages to prices in labor contracts has always been quite limited in the United States; some indexation was used during the high-inflation 1970s but the practice has been substantially reduced since then.
Moreover, some countries that adopted indexing during high-inflation periods, such as Brazil and Israel, largely abandoned the practice when inflation receded.
The savings and loan crisis of the 1980s, which cost U.S.
An important source of the S&L crisis was the unexpected inflation of the 1970s, which greatly reduced the real value of mortgage loans made by the S&Ls in an earlier, low-inflation era.
Although price stability is an end of monetary policy, it is also a means by which policy can achieve its other objectives.
In the jargon, price stability is both a goal and an intermediate target of policy.
As I will discuss, when prices are stable, both economic growth and stability are likely to be enhanced, and long-term interest rates are likely to be moderate.
Thus, even a policymaker who places relatively less weight on price stability as a goal in its own right should be careful to maintain price stability as a means of advancing other critical objectives.
Let me elaborate briefly on the relationship between price stability and the other two goals of monetary policy.
First, price stability promotes efficiency and long-term growth by providing a monetary and financial environment in which economic decisions can be made and markets can operate without concern about unpredictable fluctuations in the purchasing power of money.
As I have already noted, the dollar provides a reasonably secure gauge of real economic values only when inflation is low and stable.
High and variable inflation degrades the quality of the signals coming from the price system, as producers and consumers find it difficult to distinguish price changes arising from changes in product supplies and demands from changes arising from general inflation.
Because prices constitute a market economy's fundamental means of conveying information, the increased noise associated with high inflation erodes the effectiveness of the market system.
High inflation also complicates long-term economic planning, creating incentives for households and firms to shorten their horizons and to spend resources in managing inflation risk rather than focusing on the most productive activities.
Research is not definitive about the extent to which price stability enhances economic growth.
We do not have controlled experiments in macroeconomics, and inflation and growth are both endogenous variables that respond jointly to many factors.
Nevertheless, I am confident that the effect is positive and see the international experience as at least consistent with the view that, in combination with other sound policies, the maintenance of price stability has quite significant benefits for efficiency and growth.
That view appears to be widely shared among policymakers, as governments around the world have made extensive efforts to bring inflation down over the past two decades or so, with substantial success.
More recently, the evidence has mounted not only that low and stable inflation is beneficial for growth and employment in the long-term but also that it contributes importantly to greater stability of output and employment in the short to medium term.
Specifically, during the past twenty years or so, in the United States and other industrial countries the volatility of both inflation and output have significantly decreased--a phenomenon known to economists as the Great Moderation (Bernanke, 2004).
This finding challenges some conventional economic views, according to which greater stability of inflation can be achieved only by allowing greater fluctuations in output and employment.
The key to explaining why price stability promotes stability in both output and employment is the realization that, when inflation itself is well-controlled, then the public's expectations of inflation will also be low and stable.
In a virtuous circle, stable inflation expectations help the central bank to keep inflation low even as it retains substantial freedom to respond to disturbances to the broader economy.
Thirty years ago, the public's expectations of inflation were not well anchored.
With little confidence that the Fed would keep inflation low and stable, the public at that time reacted to the oil price increases by anticipating that inflation would rise still further.
A destabilizing wage-price spiral ensued as firms and workers competed to "keep up" with inflation.
The Fed, attempting to gain control of the deteriorating inflation situation, raised interest rates sharply; however, initially at least, these increases proved insufficient to control inflation or inflation expectations, and they added substantially to the volatility of output and employment.
The episode highlights the crucial importance of keeping inflation expectations low and stable, which can be done only if inflation itself is low and stable.
By contrast, the oil price increases of recent years appear to have had only a limited effect on core inflation (that is, inflation in the prices of goods other than energy and food), nor do they appear to have generated significant macroeconomic volatility.
Several factors account for the better performance of the economy in the recent episode, including improvements in energy efficiency and in the overall flexibility and resiliency of the economy.
But, the crucial difference from the 1970s, in my view, is that today inflation expectations are low and stable (as shown, for example, by many surveys and a variety of financial indicators).
Oil price increases in the past few years, unlike in the 1970s, have not fed through to any great extent into longer-term inflation expectations and core inflation, as the public has shown confidence that any increases in inflation will be temporary and that, in the long run, inflation will remain low.
As a result, the Fed has not had to raise interest rates sharply as it did in the 1970s but instead has been able to pursue a policy that is more gradual and predictable.
Of course, the relatively benign state of inflation expectations we enjoy today has not come automatically.
The anchoring of inflation expectations in a narrow range has been the product of Fed policies that have kept actual inflation low in recent years, clear communication of those policies, and an institutional commitment to price stability.
Price stability also contributes to the third component of the Fed's mandate, the objective of moderate long-term interest rates.
As first pointed out by the economist Irving Fisher, interest rates will tend to move in tandem with changes in expected inflation, as lenders require compensation for the loss in purchasing power of their principal over the period of the loan.
When inflation is expected to be low, lenders will require less compensation, and thus interest rates will tend to be low as well.
In addition, because price stability and the associated macroeconomic stability reduce the risks of holding long-term bonds and other securities, price stability may also reduce the premiums that lenders charge for bearing risk, lowering the overall level of rates.
I have briefly laid out the modern consensus that price stability, besides being desirable in itself, tends also to increase economic growth and stability.
At that time, the ascendant paradigm was that society faced a long-term tradeoff between price stability and high employment.
Implied in this position was a potential conflict between defenders of "hard money" and supporters of easy credit that echoed, at least faintly, the political conflicts that Wilson faced in setting up the Federal Reserve.
The development of the modern consensus was a fascinating example of the way economic science progresses through the interaction of academic research and policy experience--exactly the kind of activity that the Woodrow Wilson School was designed to promote.
The 1960s' idea that greater prosperity could be achieved if only we were willing to accept higher inflation had its origins in an academic study, although the author likely did not intend that outcome.
Phillips, using British data, showed that historically inflation had tended to be high in years in which unemployment was low.
Similar results were subsequently reported for the United States.4 Phillips did not draw strong policy conclusions from his findings.
In the decade following the publication of his paper, his empirical finding was sometimes interpreted (including, for example, by members of the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations) as showing that policymakers could choose (permanently) lower unemployment if they were willing to accept (permanently) higher inflation in exchange.
Scholars disagree somewhat about the extent to which policymakers of the time tried actively to take advantage of this supposed tradeoff, but these ideas likely provided part of the intellectual rationale that made the authorities willing to allow inflation to rise throughout the 1960s and in the early 1970s.
Their key contribution was to observe that, if inflation expectations react to changes in actual inflation in an economically reasonable way, then any tradeoff between inflation and unemployment would be short-lived at best.
To illustrate their argument, let us suppose that firms and workers set nominal wages once a year but that, sometime during the year, the prices of firms' output rise unexpectedly as a result of stronger-than-expected demand.
The combination of higher prices for their output and fixed nominal wages would raise the profitability of increasing production; thus, assuming that more workers are available at the previously fixed wage, firms would respond to the rise in prices by adding workers.
Over a short period, then, higher inflation might bring lower unemployment, consistent with the empirical results found by Phillips.
However, this logic applies only during the period in which wages and workers' expectations of inflation are fixed.
If inflation were to rise persistently, Friedman and Phelps argued, workers' expectations of inflation would not remain unchanged but would adjust to match the actual rate of inflation.
Higher inflation expectations would in turn lead workers to bargain for commensurate raises in nominal wages to preserve the real value of their earnings.
With nominal wages rising as well as prices, firms would no longer have an incentive to hire additional workers, and employment would return to its normal level.
An attempt to stimulate the economy by choosing a permanently higher level of inflation could thus not succeed, according to this analysis; such an attempt would leave the economy with higher inflation but a level of employment no different than it would have been otherwise.
In particular, among the seminal contributions of the Friedman and Phelps analyses was the identification of the key role of inflation expectations in determining the behavior of the economy, a point that remains central to our thinking today.
economy soon bore out the predictions made by Friedman and Phelps.
The inflationary policies of the 1960s led not to permanently lower unemployment, as the permanent-tradeoff theory predicted, but instead to persistently higher inflation with no improvement in unemployment.
For example, in the 1970s, core inflation averaged 6 percent, compared with 2-1/4 percent in the 1960s, and unemployment in the 1970s averaged 6-1/4 percent, compared with the 4-3/4 percent rate in the 1960s.
The volatility of output and (especially) inflation both increased, as the Fed struggled to contain inflation expectations.
Other factors, including the aforementioned surge in oil prices, played a role in the deterioration of economic performance in the 1970s.
Clearly, though, the theory that a long-run tradeoff exists between inflation and unemployment had sprung a serious leak.
Despite a growing recognition that higher inflation provided no labor-market benefits, there was, until the end of the 1970s, little appetite for taking the actions necessary to reduce inflation.
For one thing, economists and policymakers recognized that reversing the rise in inflation expectations that had occurred during the 1970s could take time and that, during the process, the nation could suffer ultimately transitory but still-serious increases in unemployment.
Furthermore, at the time, it was widely believed among economists that any stable level of inflation would be as good as another.
Although the efficiency costs associated with high inflation were acknowledged, the costs were thought to be associated mostly with changes in the underlying rate of inflation--particularly unexpected changes.
In addition, many economists argued that the efficiency costs of inflation were not particularly large.5
In his 1977 Nobel Prize address, Friedman laid out the modern argument--that, because it harms the efficient operation of markets, high inflation is more likely to raise unemployment than to lower it--and he used the experience of the 1970s to illustrate his point.6 Indeed, by the late 1970s, even economists who were not part of Friedman's monetarist circle were beginning to study and acknowledge the costs to the economy associated with high inflation.7
When Federal Reserve Board Chairman Paul Volcker embarked on his campaign to break the back of U.S.
inflation in October 1979, he drew on this existing work in formulating and defending his program.
(Volcker, by the way, was Princeton class of 1949, and he wrote his senior thesis on the Federal Reserve.) In his first testimonies and speeches after becoming Chairman, Volcker emphasized many of the arguments developed by academics for how inflation interfered with the efficient working of the economy.
And he drew on Friedman's monetarist approach, both in its advocacy of low and stable inflation and in its prescriptions for policy implementation.
In a speech given just after the Federal Open Market Committee announced its adoption of a monetarist-style policy approach in October 1979, Volcker dismissed the notion that lowering inflation meant accepting permanently higher unemployment and suggested instead that the reverse was more likely to be the case.8
Volcker's statements from this period in particular are remarkable in the extent to which they anticipate contemporary thinking about the crucial importance of low and stable inflation and inflation expectations.
He repeatedly noted, for example, how instability in inflation and inflation expectations were "jeopardizing the orderly functioning of financial and commodity markets."9 Unlike academics, of course, Volcker was in a position to put his views into practice.
Under the Volcker-led Federal Reserve, annual core inflation fell from more than 9 percent in 1980 to just below 4 percent in 1987.
Alan Greenspan, who succeeded Volcker as Fed Chairman in 1987, continued to work to stabilize inflation and inflation expectations.
Under Greenspan, the Federal Reserve gradually brought core inflation down further, to about 2 percent in recent years.
The Greenspan era also saw important steps toward increased transparency at the Federal Reserve, which helped to clarify for the public the Federal Reserve's strong institutional commitment to price stability.
In a sense, Chairman Greenspan had the harder sell: As an economist would say, we might expect diminishing marginal returns to inflation reduction.
Lower inflation has been accompanied by inflation expectations that are not only lower but better anchored, so far as we can tell.
Most striking, Greenspan's tenure aligns closely with the Great Moderation, the reduction in economic volatility I mentioned earlier, as well as with a strong revival in U.S.
productivity growth--developments that had many sources, no doubt, but that were supported, in my view, by monetary stability.
Like Volcker, Greenspan was ahead of academic thinking in recognizing the potential benefits of increased price stability.
Indeed, in recent years, academic research on monetary policy has caught up with the policymakers, providing new support for what I have termed the modern consensus, that price stability supports both strong growth and stability in output and employment.
Stable prices are desirable in themselves and thus are an important goal of monetary policy.
But stable prices are also a prerequisite to the achievement of the Federal Reserve's other mandated objectives, high employment and moderate long-term interest rates.
In particular, low and stable inflation and inflation expectations enhance both economic growth and economic stability.
The complementarity of price stability with the other goals of monetary policy is now the consensus view among economists and central bankers.
That consensus has not been achieved easily, however, but is the product of many years of policy experience, policy leadership, and sustained economic analysis.
No doubt we will continue to learn about the economy and economic policy, even as we benefit from the insights of those who went before us.
I am sure the Woodrow Wilson School, its faculty, and its students will continue to play an important role in that ongoing process.
"The Great Moderation," speech delivered at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, D.C., February 20.
"The Costs and Benefits of Going from Low Inflation to Price Stability," in Christina D.
"The Role of Monetary Policy," American Economic Review 58, 1‑17.
"Nobel Lecture: Inflation and Unemployment," Journal of Political Economy 85, 451‑72.
"Financial Panics, the Seasonality of the Nominal Interest Rate, and the Founding of the Fed, " American Economic Review 76, 125-40.
"Money-Wage Dynamics and Labor-Market Equilibrium," Journal of Political Economy 76, 678-711.
"The Relation between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money Wages in the United Kingdom, 1861-1957," Economica 25, 283-99.
"The Evolution of Economic Understanding and Post-War Stabilization Policy (PDF 439 KB)," in Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Rethinking Stabilization Policy, 11‑79.
"Statement before the Subcommittees on Domestic Monetary Policy and on International Trade, Investment and Monetary Policy of the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs," U.S.
House of Representatives, November 13, 1979, Federal Reserve Bulletin, December 1979, 958-962.
 Phillips' work actually focused on wage inflation rather than price inflation; subsequent work emphasized the latter.
 For example, Nobel-Prize-winning economist James Tobin is famously quoted as saying, "It takes a heap of Harberger triangles to fill an Okun gap," an admittedly jargon-laden way of saying that it was unlikely that the efficiency gains from lower inflation would compensate for the loss in output and employment associated with an aggressive effort to bring inflation down.

At the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) International Insurance Symposium, Washington, D.C.
I am honored to deliver the keynote address at this important international symposium.
Our focus today--on how developments and challenges around the world are reshaping the insurance industry and its regulation in Europe, Latin America, China, and India as well as here in the United States--is certainly warranted.
The worldwide integration of economies and financial markets is increasing, and a sound and vibrant insurance and reinsurance industry is needed to sustain global economic growth.
Thus, I am glad to see that this symposium has brought together regulators and major market participants from all parts of the globe.
Within the United States, the National Association of Insurance Commissioners (NAIC) has over the years promoted interstate collaboration on regulatory matters, established and maintained a centralized information system, and supported and improved the state regulation of insurance.
The NAIC has also been active in fostering cooperation on supervisory issues in the international insurance arena, through groups such as the International Association of Insurance Supervisors (IAIS), which the NAIC currently chairs; the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB); and the Joint Forum.
The NAIC is, of course, also actively involved, through the IAIS, in the work of the Financial Stability Forum (FSF), of which Alessandro Iuppa is a member.
The FSF has taken an interest in a variety of developments affecting the financial sector in recent years.
I would like to leave you with three messages based on its work in this area: first, effective collaboration among regulators and other authorities is important; second, enhanced transparency and disclosure are important; third, firms and regulators need to have early and continuous dialogue on regulatory developments.
I will discuss these statements in a minute, but before turning to them I want to give you some background on the creation of the Financial Stability Forum, its composition, and its purpose.
As you may know, the FSF was established in 1999, in the wake of the Asian financial crisis, to promote international financial stability.
The FSF uniquely brings together national authorities responsible for financial stability in major international financial centers, representatives from international financial institutions, representatives of international regulatory committees, and committees of central bank experts.
Its role is to foster cooperation among authorities at a global level in identifying vulnerabilities and strains in the global financial system and developing strategies to reduce systemic risk.
An important element of the FSF's work is to assess risks to financial stability that might arise from current economic and financial developments, to discuss risk scenarios, and to consider the capacity of the financial sector to absorb shocks.
Several years of solid economic growth and a benign financial environment have helped strengthen balance sheets in the financial sector, and this strength seems likely to continue.
Nonetheless, a number of risks and potential vulnerabilities are receiving attention, including the implications for growth and inflation of high oil prices; global fiscal and current account imbalances; elevated house prices and household debt; the compression of risk spreads, which has contributed to low long-term yields; and the potential financial fallout from geopolitical events.
Consider, for example, the effect of low long-term interest rates on the insurance sector.
Low interest rates may have induced some firms to take on extra exposure through investment in higher-risk assets, including complex or less highly-rated credit products.
In some cases, mainly outside the United States, insurers have had difficulty earning sufficient returns to meet the minimum rate they have committed to pay to policyholders.
Generally, however, the industry seems to be increasingly focused on better matching the risk characteristics and duration of assets and liabilities.
But there are other potential explanations for the low long-term rates now prevailing in many countries.
These other explanations include an excess of desired global saving over desired global investment spending and a decline in the risk premia demanded by investors, with the latter likely due in part to a marked decline in the volatility of economic activity and inflation.
Were such a move to occur, the implications for the economy and asset prices would depend on the source of the rate increase.
If, for example, desired investment spending were to strengthen--thereby boosting economic growth--the induced rise in longer-term rates need not be a worrisome development.
On the other hand, a sharp increase in risk premia, whether because of a rise in perceived risk or a reduced willingness to bear risk, likely would be more problematic.
We simply cannot know before the fact whether a potential rise in longer-term interest rates would be disruptive or not.
In addition to their exposure from unexpected developments in financial markets, insurers face a variety of other significant risks, including the potential liability arising from acts of terrorism and natural disasters.
The possibility of a pandemic gives rise to new issues for insurance and reinsurance companies.
At the same time, a pandemic could pose operational challenges by causing widespread and extended absenteeism and by disrupting the usual flow of goods and services throughout the world economy.
However, these forces are also prompting financial companies to develop far-flung business operations, which make group management and risk aggregation more challenging.
Such challenges to management exist even in a totally domestic setting, but globalization has increased their difficulty and complexity and has intensified the need for supervisory collaboration, especially between home and host supervisors, within and across sectors.
In the United States, the nationwide reach of the largest insurers has led to an increasing emphasis on interstate cooperation among insurance supervisors through the NAIC.
Meanwhile, globalization has necessitated intensified supervisory cooperation at the international level.
I should also like to commend the IAIS for its work over the years in promoting international insurance standards and information exchange.
The FSF greatly welcomes the continuing work by the IAIS on encouraging practical cooperation among supervisory authorities and on examining whether there are significant barriers to the exchange of information relating to groups and conglomerates.
Because of the formation and activity of such large groups, regulators must have a good picture of the totality of risks that each insurance or reinsurance group is running.
Regulators need to confer and to compare national systems so as to identify regulatory best-practices and avoid duplicative regulatory work.
It is important also for each regulator to understand and evaluate the major changes in the laws and regulations in the other regulators' countries and the international implications of the changes.
For cross-sectoral international issues, the NAIC makes a valuable contribution to the work of the Joint Forum, which as you know is a group that brings together banking, securities, and insurance regulators from many countries to evaluate and address cross-sectoral regulatory issues.
Some key areas of the Joint Forum's work in which the FSF has taken a close interest are the review of the regulatory and market differences across sectors; credit risk transfer; high-level principles regarding outsourcing and business continuity; and the funding of liquidity risk.
Many of these issues have the potential to affect financial stability and are of interest not only to the supervisors but to our central bank and finance ministry members.
Counterparties and investors need to be clear about the risks that firms and the industry are taking in order to manage their own exposures.
Its interest is not just to the narrow question of determining which data items to disclose but in the whole process of information disclosure.
Let me elaborate a little on the FSF's interest in the transparency and disclosure practices of the reinsurance sector.
After the events of September 11, 2001, and the significant downturn in global equity markets in 2001-02, questions arose whether reinsurance capital might erode to the point that primary insurance capacity would deteriorate.
Also at that time anecdotal reports of the industry's growing involvement in credit risk transfer activities, both as investors and as sellers of credit protection, led to concern that such involvement increased the risk that reinsurance difficulties could have wider implications in the financial system.
The FSF found that the absence of adequate information at the time made it difficult to assess the knock-on effects of potential difficulties in the sector on primary insurance and on other areas of the financial system.
The first and second Global Reinsurance Market reports have since been released and have been well received by FSF members and other users of information.
Forum members have expressed an ongoing interest in further information on the reinsurance industry's systemic links.
In this regard, I would also like to welcome the recent work by the G30 on the reinsurance sector and international financial markets.
Contained in the G30 report is a chapter on transparency that sets out a framework to improve the disclosure of risk information by reinsurers.
With financial markets and product offerings constantly evolving, firms and the industry must release timely, comprehensive, and meaningful information to enable counterparties, investors, and regulators to do their evaluation and analysis.
One area that is now receiving attention in both the private and the official communities is the perception that the financial industry is suffering from regulatory overload.
This perception arises partly because of a bunching of regulatory initiatives in recent years.
Of course, regulations that improve the strength and integrity of the financial system justify an element of regulatory burden.
Industry commentary has already resulted in significant and beneficial changes to regulations and directives.
I encourage firms to continue engaging actively and early with regulatory authorities on the range of international regulatory and legislative developments to ensure that the authorities have the full benefit of your expertise as they set policy.
All these changes mean challenging times for both industry participants and regulators.
Regulatory resources are stretched as well, and I understand many regulators are working hard to ensure that the intensity of regulatory implementation efforts does not divert resources from ongoing supervision.
We must recognize, however, that regulatory initiatives also reflect a more complex environment.
The intricate challenge here is to find the right balance between regulation, on the one hand, and the fostering of industry-led solutions through improved risk management and market practices, on the other.
I should like to say that the FSF fully supports the role of the IAIS as the global standard setter for the insurance and reinsurance industry.
This work contributes significantly to improved supervision of the insurance industry, to the development of well-regulated insurance markets, and to global financial stability.
The NAIC has been active in monitoring discussions and reviewing and commenting on insurance regulatory and supervisory papers.
I have no doubt that, given the importance of the coming initiatives, the NAIC will continue to do so.
I think that you will agree with me on the need for effective supervisory collaboration, for enhanced transparency, for public disclosure, and for a dialogue with industry participants to ensure a well-designed regulatory regime that is effective and proportionate to the risks it addresses.
The good news is that, in the future, growing global markets will present new and potentially rewarding opportunities for insurance companies.
Insurers and reinsurers have revised their underwriting philosophies, developed new models to assess risk, improved the adequacy of their risk profiles, and adjusted their coverage policies.
Many regulators have also made significant changes to ensure that their regulations keep pace with developments or, at least, do not fall too far behind.
These efforts give me confidence that both firms and regulators will continue to meet the challenges that lie ahead.

At the ceremonial swearing-in by President Bush, Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Washington, D.C.
Today marks only the third visit of a President to the Federal Reserve.
Members of the President's economic team and the heads of the federal financial regulatory agencies have also joined us this morning.
The Federal Reserve was created by Congress in 1913 and entrusted with the power, granted originally to the Congress by the U.S.
Accordingly, it is incumbent on the Federal Reserve to report regularly to, and work closely with, the Congress.
Their leadership and insight have contributed immeasurably to the strength and stability of our economy.
That these distinguished guests have chosen to join us today is a testament to the centrality of this institution to the nation's economic life.
Our mission, as set forth by the Congress, is a critical one: to preserve price stability, to foster maximum sustainable growth in output and employment, and to promote a stable and efficient financial system that serves all Americans well and fairly.
In his remarks in this building in 1937, President Roosevelt described as our purpose "to gain for all of our people the greatest attainable measure of economic well-being, the largest degree of economic security and stability."
I know also that I can rely on the enormous strengths of this institution: excellent leadership on the Board and in the Reserve Banks and unmatched expertise and experience in the staff.
Ferguson, Jr., who just swore me in, and many members of the Federal Reserve staff--here, in New York and around the country--worked inexhaustibly to ensure the continued functioning and recovery of the American financial system.
The dedication and knowledge demonstrated that day by so many people exemplifies why the Federal Reserve as an institution is far more than any single individual.

But financial innovation also presents new and different aspects of risk that institutions need to address.
I will first describe some of the broader risk management issues facing banks.
Financial institutions have always faced the task of managing their risk exposures while remaining profitable and competitive.
Yet challenges are also opportunities: good risk management is an art that combines the ability to use financial innovation to improve profitability with an understanding of how risk profiles change as a result of that innovation.
The Federal Reserve, in its role as both a bank supervisor and the nation’s central bank, has an obvious interest in maintaining the stability of the banking industry and the financial system as a whole.
bank and thrift regulatory agencies, are responsible for ensuring that banking institutions operate in a safe and sound manner.
But with the advent of very large banking organizations that engage in a wide variety of business activities--some of them quite complex--the Federal Reserve has become even more interested in ensuring that banking organizations understand the risks of these activities as well as their potential impact.
In some cases, firms may be practicing good risk management on an exposure-by-exposure basis, but they may not be paying close enough attention to aggregation of exposures across the entire organization.
Rapid growth can place considerable pressure on, among other areas, an organization’s management information systems, change-management controls, strategic planning, credit concentrations, and asset-liability management.
Of course, there are other dimensions of risk to consider besides scale.
Another dimension of risk to be considered is the complexity and sophistication of an organization’s products and services.
While an institution may alter its risks by expanding into several business lines, the nature of its products and services also makes a tremendous difference in its risk profile.
At first glance, the new products may appear to be no more risky than more traditional products; however, when more carefully examined, new products can have a higher risk potential, or at least one that is not fully known.
Institutions should also be aware that traditional products packaged in a slightly different way or offered to a new customer segment can substantially alter their risk profile.
I point to recent cases of legal and compliance risks that occurred because the institutions involved did not necessarily conduct proper due diligence on their new products.
The challenge of understanding the potential risks associated with new products in a given business line is heightened when firms attempt to see how those risks intersect with the risks from its other business lines.
Furthermore, an institution has to pay attention to the behavior and performance of its risk mitigants, whose appropriateness and applicability may also vary with changes in the market.
The bottom line for today’s banking institutions, particularly the largest and most complex ones, is that they must continue to monitor very carefully the embedded risks of their products and services, pay close attention to subtle changes in business practices that could affect the risks related to a given product, and fully understand how the risks in all their business lines intersect and combine to affect the risk profile of the consolidated entity.
Now that I have described in fairly broad terms the types of risk-management challenges institutions may encounter, I think it would be helpful to provide some concrete examples.
banking agencies recently issued for public comment supervisory guidance on commercial real estate (CRE), which focused particularly on CRE concentrations.
As you know, CRE played a central role in the banking problems of the late 1980s and early 1990s and has historically been a highly volatile asset class.
The agencies’ CRE concentration guidance, which excludes owner-occupied CRE, is intended to reinforce existing risk-management guidelines on CRE, and it offers institutions some suggestions for improving their risk-management practices.
The agencies share a concern that some institutions’ risk-management practices are not keeping up with the growth in their CRE exposures.
The guidance describes the key risk-management elements for an institution’s CRE lending, because banks, in order to attract new business and sustain loan volume, may be inclined to occasionally make some compromises and concessions to borrowers.
We also continue to monitor whether lenders routinely adjust covenants, lengthen maturities, or reduce collateral requirements.
Additionally, the guidance reemphasizes that institutions should have capital levels appropriate for the risk associated with their CRE concentrations.
By focusing on CRE concentrations, the guidance is also intended to apply to those institutions that might already have excellent underwriting and risk management of their existing CRE exposures but that might not be as vigilant or as rigorous in their management of those exposures on an aggregate portfolio basis.
That is, underwriting policies, as well as management and board reporting, should reflect aggregate portfolio risk as CRE loans rise to a significant multiple of capital.
A bank with significant concentrations may need to both strengthen its control environment and hold capital well above regulatory minimums.
This is particularly important, since CRE lending in recent years has occurred under fairly benign credit conditions and, naturally, those conditions are unlikely to continue indefinitely.
From a risk-management and capital perspective, institutions should employ stress tests and other exercises to help identify CRE vulnerabilities, including potential correlations with non-CRE exposures that might move in the same direction during a downturn.
These mortgage loans, often referred to as “nontraditional mortgage loans,” include “interest-only” (IO) mortgage loans, in which a borrower pays no loan principal for the first few years of the loan, and “payment-option” adjustable-rate mortgages (option ARMs), in which a borrower has flexible payment options--and which also could result in negative amortization.
In 2005, option ARMs and IOs were an estimated one-third of total U.S.
While the credit quality of residential mortgages generally remains strong, the Federal Reserve and other banking supervisors are concerned that current risk-management techniques may not fully address the level of risk in nontraditional mortgages, a risk that would be heightened by a downturn in the housing market.
These borrowers are more likely to experience an unmanageable payment shock at some point during the life of the loan, which means they may be more likely to default on the loan.
Further, nontraditional mortgage loans are becoming more prevalent in the subprime market at the same time that risk tolerances in the capital markets have increased.
When risk spreads return to more “normal” levels, banks need to be prepared for the resulting impact on liquidity and pricing.
Supervisors have also observed that lenders are increasingly combining nontraditional mortgage loans with weaker mitigating controls on credit exposures, such as allowing reduced documentation in evaluating the applicant’s creditworthiness and making simultaneous second-lien mortgages as competition in the mortgage banking industry intensifies.
Thus, while elements of the product structure may have been used successfully by some banks in the past, the absence of traditional underwriting controls may have unforeseen effects on losses realized in these products.
In view of these industry trends, the Federal Reserve and the other banking agencies decided to issue the draft guidance on nontraditional mortgage products.
The proposed guidance emphasizes that an institution’s risk-management processes should allow it to adequately identify, measure, monitor, and control the risk associated with these products.
The guidance reminds lenders of the importance of assessing a borrower’s ability to repay a loan, including monthly payments when amortization begins and interest rates rise.
Bankers should ensure that borrowers have sufficient information so that they clearly understand, before choosing a product or payment option, the terms and associated risks of these loans, particularly how far monthly payments can rise and that negative amortization can increase the amount owed on the property above what was originally borrowed.
These products warrant strong risk-management standards as well as appropriate capital and loan-loss reserves.
Another area the financial sector and the regulatory community are focused on today is compliance-risk management.
“Compliance risk” can be defined as the risk of legal or regulatory sanctions, financial loss, or damage to an organization’s reputation and franchise value; this type of risk may result when an organization fails to comply with the laws, regulations, or standards or codes of conduct that are applicable to its business activities and functions.
The Federal Reserve expects banking organizations to have in place an infrastructure that is able to identify and control the compliance risks facing their organization.
Fortunately, many banking organizations in the United States substantially affected by these risks are ahead of the curve and have invested in enterprise-wide corporate compliance.
I also emphasize the need for the board of directors and senior management to ensure that staff members throughout an organization understand the compliance objectives and the role they have in implementing the compliance program.
An integrated approach to compliance-risk management can be particularly effective for Bank Secrecy Act and anti-money-laundering (BSA/AML) compliance.
Often, the identification of a BSA/AML risk or deficiency in one area of business can indicate potential problems or concerns in other activities across the organization.
Controlling BSA/AML risk continues to be a primary concern for banking organizations.
We recognize the investment and commitment that organizations have made toward compliance with BSA/AML requirements, and, in return, we continue to work to ensure that obligations in this area are clearly understood and communicated to banking organizations and examiners alike.
The Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council (FFIEC) BSA/AML Examination Manual issued last year is one example of our interagency efforts.
Our ongoing supervision of banking organizations indicates that the preponderance of institutions continues to be sound and well managed.
As institutions continue to offer new products and services, they face the challenge of incorporating the associated risks into their existing risk-management framework.
Additionally, as supervisors, we want to ensure that institutions are not only able to identify, measure, and manage their risks, but that they are also developing and maintaining appropriate corporate-governance structures to keep up with their business activities and risk-taking.

I appreciate the opportunity to speak with you today about productivity and the outlook for the U.S.
As you know, long-term growth in productivity is critically important to improving the standard of living in any economy.
The rate of growth of productivity can significantly affect inflation and economic expansion.
But before I comment on productivity, I'd like to begin with a review of recent economic developments.
Real economic activity has continued to expand at a solid pace.
Clearly, the tragedy that hurricanes inflicted on New Orleans and surrounding areas of the Gulf Coast will have major implications for the people and the economy in those regions for a long time.
However, for the nation as a whole, employment and industrial production indicators were only briefly disrupted by the hurricanes during the late summer and early fall.
At the national level, consumer spending has been well maintained, and the fundamentals--such as income growth and household balance sheets--remain supportive.
Many news reports and anecdotes suggest that the housing market is cooling and that investors are participating less actively.
Turning to prices, core inflation has stayed relatively low in recent months despite the run-up in energy costs.
The unemployment rate, at 5 percent in the second half of 2005, was down about 1 1/4 percentage points from its recent peak in early 2003 and at its lowest level in four years.
Meanwhile, the factory operating rate--a measure of resource utilization in the manufacturing sector--was 79.6 percent in December, a rate that is approaching its 1972-2004 average of 79.8 percent.
And although the overall high technology aggregate is below its long-run average rate of utilization, the operating rate at firms making computers and peripherals is above average, and the rate at manufacturers of communications equipment has risen significantly over the past year.
As in the mid- to late-1990s, resilient productivity growth appears to be helping contain the inflationary pressures that might otherwise be expected to accompany a narrowing margin of resource slack.
That said, we at the Federal Reserve will remain vigilant for any sign of a deterioration in the inflation outlook.
As I mentioned earlier, the core inflation rate has stayed relatively low in recent months, as rapid gains in productivity have tended to offset cost increases.
Reflecting these developments is a continued rise in corporate profits, which has allowed firms to further bolster their strong balance sheet positions.
Corporate balance sheets have improved dramatically over the past couple of years because of surging profits, low interest rates, and a concerted deleveraging, which have combined to reduce debt burdens and increase liquidity in the form of cash assets.
Generally speaking, the growth of profits and the related buildup of cash have been broadly distributed across industries.
And with the sound corporate financial positions, credit spreads remain narrow, and bank lending terms remain favorable.
These beneficial financial conditions, combined with rising utilization rates, bode well for further increases in business capital expenditures.
Indeed, capital expenditures for most types of equipment increased significantly during the third quarter, and Census data on orders and shipments suggest that investment continued to expand in the fourth quarter, with much of the gain in spending for information technology--that is, computers, communications equipment, and software.
Let me now turn from the overall economic outlook to productivity and technology developments.
Productivity growth receives a considerable amount of attention from policymakers because its rate is an important determinant of a nation's standard of living.
The development of farm machinery in the early 1800s, for example, boosted the productivity of farmers and consequently freed up labor to shift to the industrial sector.
More recently, continued increases in industrial productivity have enabled a relative shift of employment into the production of services.
Although manufacturing employment has fallen sharply in recent years, both in absolute terms and as a share of total employment, the output of the nation's manufacturers has continued to increase because of impressive productivity gains.
Looking beyond manufacturing to the broader nonfarm business sector, we see that productivity growth has risen significantly over the past decade in the United States.
Labor productivity gains accelerated from an average annual increase of 1 1/2 percent over 1973-95 to an average annual increase of 2 1/2 percent over 1995-2001.
From the first quarter of 2001 through the third quarter of 2005, labor productivity growth picked up even more--to an annual rate of nearly 3 1/2 percent.
Thus, despite a recession, a tech-sector meltdown, a stock market correction, terrorism, and corporate governance scandals, our economy has proven remarkably resilient and productive.
These productivity gains result from many forces, including business investment that has increased the amount and quality of capital available to the workforce, business process innovations, and the growth of innovative, research-intensive industries such as information technology and biotechnology.
Because firms may take a while to absorb a rapid run-up in investment, the productivity payoffs to investment may be drawn out for some time as firms learn more effective ways to use the capital they have acquired.
Anecdotal information suggests that some of the recent productivity gains appear to reflect firms making better use of existing capital and improving business processes.
I will focus on developments in the information technology (IT) sector; we at the Federal Reserve know more about IT than other high technology areas because of the availability of a wide variety of data.
Moreover, economists better understand the role of IT in the U.S.
economy, particularly its influence on productivity growth, because developments in this sector are more easily quantified than developments in other pioneering fields, such as biotechnology.
In thinking about information technology equipment and productivity, I find a useful starting point to be recalling the role of IT capital accumulation during the last business cycle.
Work by Federal Reserve economists suggests that a large chunk of the increase in the rate of productivity growth in the late-1990s was due to the accumulation of IT capital.
During that period, many firms invested heavily in IT in an effort to stay on top of the so-called "technological revolution." One consequence of this drive to acquire high-tech equipment appears to have been a massive overhang of IT capital that has only recently been largely worked through.
The accumulation of IT capital boosted productivity growth in many industries.
As a result, in recent years firms appear to be realizing further productivity gains as they discover new and better methods for using IT.
As I'm sure many in this audience know better than I do, one way in which firms have started to use IT more effectively is by exploiting synergies among network equipment, computing equipment, and software.
These synergies may spur adoption of new technologies and increase the potential for further productivity gains.
More recently, firms have been using leading-edge IT products to consolidate their networks, effectively enabling a single communications network to carry data, voice, and video.
Besides innovations in hardware, ongoing developments in software have helped firms augment the capabilities of their communications equipment and computer networks.
For many years, companies in the United States have been at the forefront of new technology developments.
With demand for IT continually evolving, taking a moment to review the U.S.
The Federal Reserve Board's estimates of capacity in industries that manufacture high-tech equipment--which includes semiconductors and related electronic components, computers, and communications equipment--increased more than 20 percent between the fourth quarter of 2004 and the fourth quarter of 2005, after rising at an annual average rate of about 8 percent during the previous three years.
So, what high-tech equipment do we produce in the United States, when every item at the local computer store appears to have been made abroad? A significant portion of the U.S.
But we must keep in mind that, even for products that are produced abroad and imported, U.S.
companies continue to perform a significant share of the research and development that those products entail.
Because the development and the production of IT products play a vital role in the U.S.
economy, the Federal Reserve continually watches for new developments in the pace of technological change and tries to gauge the likely influences of these developments on productivity growth.
For example, the production of communications equipment dropped sharply during the last recession, and these products accounted for a large share of the capital overhang in high-tech equipment.
However, since its trough in 2002, the Federal Reserve Board's industrial production index for communications equipment has risen about 75 percent, with particularly pronounced increases in the production of high-end routers and switches.
Another part of the difficulty is determining exactly when changes occur and how much of any change is due to a particular improvement.
With the growing use of mobile, battery-powered communications technologies and computers, energy consumption and connectivity may be just as important as speed.
In light of the difficulties and uncertainties that are associated with measuring the pace of technological change, I want to take a moment to comment on the risks for the appropriate conduct of monetary policy that are associated with technology and productivity.
Because technology feeds into various macroeconomic aggregates--including household and business spending, productivity, and inflation--its implications for the U.S.
economy will continue to necessitate careful observation, improved measurement, and study.
Members of the Federal Reserve staff, both at the Board and at the Reserve Banks, have contributed significantly along all three of these dimensions by improving measures of high-tech prices and output and by studying the implications of technology on U.S.
Accordingly, monetary policy makers will remain alert, carefully monitoring technological developments that have the potential to mitigate inflationary pressures as well as developments that could raise the risk of overheating.

